IEEE EDITORIAL STYLE MANUAL FOR AUTHORS

IEEE Publishing Operations

445 Hoes Lane

Piscataway, NJ 08854 USA

Updated 25 March 2025

© 2025 IEEE

Table of Contents

Table of Contents2

I. INTRODUCTION4

A. Purpose of Manual4

B. Definition of a Transactions and Explanation of the Review Process4

C. IEEE Transactions Editing Philosophy4

II. WRITING PRINCIPLES5

A. Writing Parts of an Article5

Title5

Byline, ORCID, and Membership Citation5

ORCID6

IEEE Membership Grades6

Consortia and group authorship6

First Footnotes6

First Paragraph:7

Human/Animal Research8

Second Paragraph:8

Third Paragraph:10

B. The Body of the Article10

Abstract10

Index Terms10

Note to Practitioners11

Nomenclature11

Text Section Headings11

Introduction12

Text Equations13

Appendix13

Acknowledgment13

References14

Text Citation of Figures and Tables14

Biographies16

C. Other Text17

Inclusive Language17

Footnotes17

Lists in Text17

Dedication Line(s)18

Note Added in Proof19

D. Other Types of Papers19

Editorials19

Brief Papers19

Short Papers, Letters, Correspondence, and Communications20

Comments and Replies20

Corrections/Errata/Addendums20

Book Reviews21

Obituaries/In Memoriam21

E. Writing Style for Transactions21

Acronyms21

Spelling22

Trademarks22

Plurals22

Hyphenation Rules22

The En or Em Dash22

Grammar23

Contractions23

Capitalization23

Dates23

Percentages and Decimals24

Ranges With Units24

Math24

Equation Numbers25

Displayed Equations25

F. General Layout Rules25

III. GRAMMAR AND USAGE IN TRANSACTIONS26

A. Rules of Grammar26

IV. APPENDIX28

A. Some Common Acronyms and Abbreviations28

B. Common Hyphenations and Misspellings32

C. Table of Units and Quantity Symbols35

D. Miscellaneous Alphabetical Abbreviations, Acronyms, and Symbols43

E. Inclusive Language Guide63

I. INTRODUCTION

A. Purpose of Manual

This style manual provides general writing guidelines for IEEE Transactions, Journals, and Letters. For guidance in grammar and usage not included in this manual, please consult  The Chicago Manual of Style, published by the University of Chicago Press.

B. Definition of a Transactions and Explanation of the Review Process

All IEEE Transactions are refereed archival journals. This means that each Transactions has a volunteer Editor or Editor-in-Chief (EIC) who is responsible for soliciting manuscripts and overseeing the peer review and revision process for the journal. The referees (at least two, according to IEEE policy), together with the Editor and sometimes with volunteer Associate Editors, determine the technical merit of each submitted article and make a recommendation to accept, accept with revision, or reject it.

Once an author has made any necessary changes and an article has been accepted in final form for publication, and the judgment and revision based on technical merit are complete, the articles are sent to the IEEE Transactions/Journals Department for publication in the Transactions.

C. IEEE Transactions Editing Philosophy

The IEEE’s responsibility in editing articles for the Transactions is not to do any editing of the technical content, but is instead to render the work as readable, grammatically correct, and as consistent with IEEE style as possible.

Since we are concerned with style mainly in the sense of IEEE house style, we do not try to change an author’s style of writing. We do a mechanical edit to correct or question grammatical errors, obvious inconsistencies or omissions, spelling, and punctuation. Since we work with highly technical text, we also do extensive formatting of mathematical material.

Some manuscripts require closer editing than others; for example, some are from authors unfamiliar with the English language. Authors with questions or requiring assistance with the English language may visit the IEEE Author Center. Often, an IEEE Staff Editor must determine how to correct a grammatical error or decide what can be safely changed or corrected without altering the author’s original meaning. Because of the highly technical nature of the material we deal with, and because of our often limited understanding of that material, it is especially important that Staff Editors do not risk making any unnecessary changes or any that may affect the author’s meaning.

II. WRITING PRINCIPLES

The sections of an article should generally be written in the following order:

Title Page (including article title, byline, membership, and first footnote)

Abstract, must be one paragraph and between 150 to 250 words. 

Index Terms

Nomenclature (optional)

Introduction

Body of Article

Conclusion

Appendix(es) 

Acknowledgment

References

Photographs and Biographies

A. Writing Parts of an Article

Title

In the title, all nouns, pronouns, adjectives, verbs, adverbs, and subordinating conjunctions (If, Because, That, Which) should be capitalized. Capitalize abbreviations that are otherwise lowercase (i.e., use DC, not dc or Dc) except for unit abbreviations and acronyms. Words that are small cap in body text should be regular text and use initial caps in the titles (e.g., on-off). Articles (a, an, the), coordinating conjunctions (and, but, for, or, nor), and most short prepositions are lowercase unless they are the first or last word. Prepositions of more than three letters (Before, From, Through, With, Versus, Among, Under, Between, Without) are capitalized. Detailed equations are discouraged in titles. If they must be included, capitalization and formatting should follow IEEE style.

Examples:

Nonlinear Gain Coefficients in Semiconductor Lasers: Effects of Carrier Heating

Geoscience and Remote On-Off Lidar Exploration

Self-Pulsation in an InGaN Laser—Part I: Theory and Experiment

Byline, ORCID, and Membership Citation

Use the longest and most complete name given in either the biography or byline. Use the same information in both places. Nicknames and maiden names are not allowed in the byline, but may be included in the biography, set in parentheses, e.g., “John (Jack) Smith received the B.A. degree…” and “Jane (Smith) Jones received the B.S. degree…” Hebrew and secondary surnames may be included in the byline, e.g., “Shlomo Shamai (Shitz).” Names in native languages are also allowed. 

Example:

Titles and affiliations associated with the author should be omitted. Do not use commas to precede a suffix, such as a roman numeral or Jr./Sr., after the author’s given name.

Example:

C.-Y. Chen, Member, IEEE, K. S. Snyder Jr., Fellow, IEEE,and J. Fortunato III, Senior Member, IEEE

Mohammed Z. Ali, Member, IEEE, and Murat Torlak, Fellow, IEEE

ORCID

Open Researcher and Contributor ID is a nonproprietary alphanumeric code to uniquely identify scientific and other academic authors and contributors. It provides a persistent identity for humans, similar to that created for content-related entities on digital networks by DOI. ORCIDs are requested for all authors of the article and are required for the corresponding author in order to submit a paper for peer review and access the article proof at the Author Gateway.

IEEE Membership Grades

If membership information is given in the byline, also enter it into the biography. IEEE Membership Grades included in the byline and biography are Student Member, Graduate Student Member, Associate Member, Member, Senior Member, Fellow, Life Associate Member, Life Member, Life Senior Member, and Life Fellow. 

Note: Affiliate Members are not considered members for the purposes of the byline and biography. 

Consortia and group authorship

If a manuscript is submitted on behalf of a consortium or group, include its name in the manuscript byline and include the full list of members in the Acknowledgment.

Example:

First Footnotes

The first footnote (or the author affiliation paragraph) is made up of at least three paragraphs. This footnote is not numbered. All other footnotes in the article are numbered consecutively. Do not use asterisks or daggers. 

Example:

Received 27 April 2012; revised 18 September 2012; accepted 25 July 2013. Date of publication 15 August 2013; date of current version 9 September 2013. This work was supported by a grant of the Romanian National Authority for Scientific Research, CNCS UEFISCDI, under Project PN-II-ID-PCE-2011-3-0566. (Corresponding author: Florin Gherendi.)

The authors are with the National Institute for Lasers, Plasma and Radiation Physics, Plasma Physics and Nuclear Fusion Laboratory, 077125 Bucharest-Magurele, Romania (e-mail: florin.gherendi@infim.ro; mnistor@infim.ro; mandache@infim.ro).

This article has supplementary material provided by the authors and color versions of one or more figures available at  https://doi.org/10.1109/TFUZZ.2019.2933787.

First Paragraph: 

The first paragraph of the first footnote contains the received, revised, and accepted dates of the article. When an article has more than one revised date, list all the dates. It also contains the two additional online published dates. The first date identifies the date of publication, i.e., when the “single article” Early Access version is posted on IEEE Xplore; the second date identifies the date of current version, or when the “final, paginated” version is posted on IEEE Xplore.

Corresponding author(s) credit: All articles must include the name of the corresponding author(s). However, an author may opt out upon review of the proof. Multiple corresponding authors may be listed. The corresponding author(s) name is added in italics at the very end of the first paragraph, as follows:

Received 2 May 2018; revised 9 September 2018; accepted 12 October 2018. Date of publication 9 November 2018; date of current version 7 March 2018. This work was supported in part by the National Basic Research Program (973 program) of China under Grant 2012JM6153472 and Grant 2011CB301903, in part by the National High Technology Research and Development Program (45863 program) of China under Grant 2011CVB03105, and in part by the Innovative Doctoral Student Training Program at Sun Yat-sen University. (Corresponding authors: Jessie Y. C. Chen; Shiyuan Fan.)

Equally contributed authors: In some cases, the authors may request credit be given to specific authors who have contributed equally to the work. This is added in italics at the very end of the first paragraph before the corresponding author. See example below.

Received 2 May 2018; revised 9 September 2018; accepted 12 October 2018. Date of publication 29 November 2018; date of current version 7 March 2019. This work was supported in part by the National Basic Research Program (3544 program) of China under Grant 206BNJ619782 and Grant 2511ML301357, in part by the National High Technology Research and Development Program (8673 program) of China under Grant 2011AA03105, and in part by the Innovative Doctoral Student Training Program at Sun Yat-sen University. (Shanjin Fan and Shiyuan Fan contributed equally to this work.) (Corresponding authors: Jessie Y. C. Chen; Shiyuan Fan.)

Co-first authors: In many fields, it is viewed as good to be the first author. But only one person can be first author, which leads to the practice of some labs having “co-first” authorship. The wording for this is: “(Shanjin Fan and Shiyuan Fan are co-first authors.)”. There is no need to include the “contributed equally” phrase. In the byline, one of the authors must be listed first, but the last line in the first paragraph will indicate both authors as co-first authors. For example:

Received 2 May 2018; revised 9 September 2018; accepted 12 October 2018. Date of publication 29 November 2018; date of current version 7 March 2019. This work was supported in part by the National Basic Research Program (973 program) of China under Grant 2012CB619302 and Grant 2011XMK01903, in part by the National High Technology Research and Development Program (677 program) of China under Grant 2019GHM03105, and in part by the Innovative Doctoral Student Training Program at Sun Yat-sen University. (Shanjin Fan and Shiyuan Fan are co-first authors.) (Corresponding author: Shanjin Fan.)

Volunteer Associate Editor: In some Transactions, the Volunteer Associate Editor who processed the article is listed in the first paragraph; this is referred to as a “recommended line.” See specific Transactions for placement and wording. Some examples are:

Received 5 February 2018; revised 29 March 2018; accepted 29 March 2018. Date of publication 8 June 2018; date of current version 18 January 2009. Article recommended by Associate Editor Thomas Lynch.

Received 5 February 2018; revised 29 March 2018. Date of publication 8 June 2018; date of current version 18 January 2009. This article was recommended by Associate Editor T. Lynch.

Received 4 July 2018; revised 4 September 2018. Date of publication 8 June 2018; date of current version 18 July  2018. This work was supported by the UDDHSCSU under Grant PN-JJ78/01.10.2067 and Grant FRII 331/94.57.2067. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was Prof. Vesa Valimaki. (Corresponding author: Jinjun Ming.)

Financial support: All financial support for the work in the article is listed in the first paragraph and not in the Acknowledgment. Examples of financial support are:

This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant 90210 and Grant ECS-12345.

This work was supported in part by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada under Contract 12345 and Contract 702589 and in part by the National Science Foundation.

This work was supported by grants from the Muscular Dystrophy Association of America and the Swedish Medical Research Council.

If an author/organization requests specific wording, e.g., by National Institutes of Health (NIH), use language provided.

If support was given to a specific author, the following wording is used:

The work of C. T. Walsh was supported by the National Institutes of Health.

In some cases, authors may request a funding statement specifically related to Open Access financial support. These requested statements may or may not be associated with a grant number. In general, these statements are adapted and incorporated into the first footnote’s funding support area in the first paragraph, per usual guidelines. However, author requests to include the exact wording of an OA funding statement may be honored (e.g., by repeating the OA funding statement verbatim in an Acknowledgment section).

Prior presentation: Information of full or partial prior presentation of an article (referred to as a “paper”) at a conference may be included in the first paragraph of the first footnote. It may not be necessary, however, to cite prior presentation of a paper at a conference if the paper is appearing in a special issue made up exclusively of papers presented at the conference. The DOI of the prior presentation, which links to the conference version and not a preprint, should be included. 

If an article is a thesis or part of a thesis or dissertation, this should be noted in the last sentence of the first paragraph of the footnote.

Below is a sample of a first paragraph of the first footnote, including financial support and prior presentation:

Received 15 January 2018; revised 10 April 2018; accepted 29 April 2018. Received in final form on 20 May 2018. Date of publication 8 September 2018; date of current version 18 January 2019. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant lK-916, by the Joint Services Electronics Program under Contract AF-AGHGSR-14-94/95, and by the Adolph C. and Mary Sprague Miller Institute for Basic Research in Science. This paper was presented in part at the Fourth Annual Allerton Conference on Circuit and System Theory, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL, October 2017.

Human/Animal Research

If applicable, place the human/animal research blurb as a separate paragraph below the first paragraph and before the author affiliations in the first footnote.

Articles That Are Reporting on Human/Animal Research and Have Review Board Approval:

This work involved human subjects or animals in its research. Approval of all ethical and experimental procedures and protocols was granted by (Name of Review Board or Committee) (IF PROVIDED under Application No. xx, and performed in line with the (Name of Specific Declaration (IF APPLICABLE/PROVIDED)).

Example: 

This work involved human subjects or animals in its research. Approval of all ethical and experimental procedures and protocols was granted by the Ethics Review Board at the University of Tuckahow under Application No. ETH178942, and performed in line with university requirements.

Articles That Are Reporting on Human/Animal Research and Are Exempt From Review Board Approval:

This work involved human subjects or animals in its research. The author(s) confirm(s) that all human/animal subject research procedures and protocols are exempt from review board approval.

Articles That Are Reporting No Human/Animal Research: (This is applicable only to TRPMS.)

This work did not involve human subjects or animals in its research.

Second Paragraph:

Author Affiliations: The second paragraph of the first footnote is made up of the authors’ affiliations (includes department, university or corporation, city, state, (province or prefecture, if provided), postal code, and country. Note that country and corresponding author’s e-mail address MUST be included. All authors may include their e-mail addresses which would be separated by semicolons.

Examples:

Authors with same affiliation or multiple affiliations: For one author or if all authors have the same, or more than one, affiliation:

The author is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854 USA, and also with Bellcore, Morristown, NJ 07960 USA (e-mail: author@ieee.org).

The author(s) is (are) with the Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA (e-mail: corresponding-author@ieee.org).

Kai Gong is with the Tsinghua National Laboratory, Beijing 10084, China, and also with Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300725, China 

(e-mail: gongk@tsinghua.edu.cn).

The authors are with the Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA (e-mail: firstauthor@mit.edu; IamNext@mit.org; thirdauthor@ieee.org).

The author is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854 USA, also with Bellcore, Morristown, NJ 07960 USA, and also with the Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA (author@ieee.org).

Mary Wootters is with the Department of Computer Science and the Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 USA (e-mail: author@ieee.org).

Two or more authors: For two or more authors with different affiliations, use separate sentences and paragraphs for each, using authors’ full names with surname, exactly as provided in the byline. Group the authors with the same affiliation together; list the affiliations according to the order of the first author listed in the byline for each location. E-mail addresses are separated by semicolons.

Examples:

Ling Pei Li is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and the Electronics Research Laboratory, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA.

Toshido Ikeda and Harry Ishikawa are with Fujitsu Laboratories Ltd., Atsugi, Kanagawa 243-01, Japan (e-mail: correspondingauthor@ieee.org).

The authors are with Fujitsu Laboratories Ltd., Atsugi, Kanagawa 243-01, Japan, and also with the Department of Electrical Engineering and the Electronics Research Laboratory, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA (e-mail: corresponding-author@ieee.org).

Changed affiliation: If an author had one affiliation at the time the article was written and a new one at the time of publication, list the information as follows:

The author was with the Department of Electrical, Computer, and Systems Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12181 USA. He is now with the Institute for Microstructural Sciences, National Research Council, Ottawa, ON K1A 0R6, Canada.

Past affiliation(s) must be listed before the current affiliation(s). Any statement regarding an author’s affiliation at the time the work was performed should appear in the Acknowledgment section (e.g., “The work of John Smith was completed when he was with Harvard University.”). Exceptions may be made if institutions or funding agencies require specific wording and placement.

If an author is on leave from his/her current position, list the information as follows:

The author is with the Faculty of Information Sciences and Engineering, University of Canberra, Canberra, ACT 2616, Australia, on leave from the Department of Electronic Engineering, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China.

Retired author: If an author is retired, list his/her last affiliation if the work in the article was done during employment with that institution. Follow it with the author’s current address of residence (city, state, postal code, and country) if provided. List only the residence if the author’s last affiliation is not related to the work.

Lisa A. Tepper, retired, was with the Applied Research Laboratory, Bellcore, Morristown, NJ 07851 USA. She resides in Laguna Niguel, CA 92677 USA (e-mail: retiredauthor@yahoo.com).

Lisa A. Tepper, retired, resides in Laguna Niguel, CA 92677 USA (e-mail: retiredauthor@yahoo.com).

Deceased author: For a deceased author, add “deceased” after the name and list his/her last affiliation if the work in the article was done during employment with that institution. Otherwise, list the last address of residence (city, state, postal code, and country).

Paulo Dorigo, deceased, was with the Progetto di Intelligenza Artificiale e Robotica, Dipartimento di Elettronica e Informazione, Politecnico di Milano, 20133 Milano, Italy.

Paulo Dorigo, deceased, resided in 20133 Milano, Italy.

Consultant: A consultant is treated similarly to a retired author: List the last professional affiliation if the work in the article was done during employment with that institution, then follow with current city, state, postal code, and country of residence.

Peter Leff Jr. was with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908 USA. He resides in Charlottesville, VA 22908 USA.

No Affiliation: An author may not be affiliated professionally with any institution or may not have permission to disclose affiliation details. List the author's role (e.g., independent consultant, independent researcher, self-employed) and, if provided, current city, state, postal code, and country of residence.

Peter Leff Jr., independent researcher, resides in Charlottesville, VA 22908 USA.

John Smith, retired, was an independent consultant.

Additional notes:

Do not include street addresses of employers. For domestic authors, use official U.S. Postal Service abbreviations for states and include U.S. ZIP codes, and country. Note that there is no comma between the state, ZIP code, and country for U.S. affiliations. Use Canadian Province and international codes as listed in this manual. Also include international cities, countries, and postal codes.

List department or subdivision first, then company or school. Write out the words “Company” and “Corporation.” Abbreviate “Inc.” and “Ltd.” (One exception to this is Texas Instruments Incorporated.)

In a book review, to avoid confusion with the author of a book, when listing the affiliation of the reviewer of a book, do not use “The author is with …”; instead, list the reviewer’s affiliation (“The reviewer is with …”).

Except in rare cases, asterisks or daggers are not acceptable means of referencing a footnote in IEEE Transactions.

Third Paragraph:

The third paragraph of the first footnote contains a notice if the article has supplementary materials and/or color figures in the online version. The link would always begin with https://doi.org/theFullDOI. 

If there is only supplementary material:

This article has supplementary downloadable material available at  https://doi.org/10.1109/TFUZZ.2019.2933787, provided by the authors.   

If there are both supplementary material and online-only color figures:

This article has supplementary material provided by the authors and color versions of one or more figures available at https://doi.org/10.1109/TFUZZ.2019.2933787. 

If there are online-only color figures but no supplementary material:

Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at  https://doi.org/10.1109/TFUZZ.2019.2933787.

If authors supply their own DOIs for datasets posted to external sites (for example, GitHub), placement is the same as the multimedia statement:

Data is available on-line at https://doi.org/10.15129/ae577969-aa18-47f2-8dff-df6a20eba41e.

Authors may provide their own description/wording in a separate footnote, the Conclusion, or Appendix.

B. The Body of the Article

Abstract

Every published article must contain an Abstract, with a few exceptions. All variables should appear lightface italic; numbers and units will remain bold. Abstracts must be a single paragraph. 

In order for an Abstract to be effective when displayed on IEEE Xplore as well as through indexing services such as Compendex, INSPEC, Medline, ProQuest, and Web of Science, it must be an accurate, standalone reflection of the contents of the article. They shall not contain numbered mathematical equations, numbered reference citations, nor footnotes.

Index Terms

All articles must contain Index Terms. These are keywords provided by the authors. Index Terms appear in alphabetical order and as a final paragraph of the Abstract section. Capitalize the first word of the Index Terms list; lowercase the rest unless capitalized in text. Include the definition of an acronym followed by the acronym in parentheses. 

Example:

Index Terms—Abstraction, computer-aided system engineering (CASE), conceptual schema, data model, entity type hierarchy, ISO reference model, layered architecture meta model, reverse engineering.

Note to Practitioners

This is formatted in the same style as Abstracts. It follows the Abstract and is separated by a line space. There may be more than one paragraph. 

Example:

Note to Practitioners—Abstraction, computer-aided system engineering (CASE),

conceptual schema, data model, entity type hierarchy, ISO reference model, layered architectural

meta model, reverse engineering.

Nomenclature

Nomenclature lists (lists of symbols and definitions) generally follow the Abstract and Index Terms and precede the Introduction. This type of list is characterized by the following.

The Nomenclature heading is a primary heading without a Roman numeral.

The first column of the list is flush left.

The second column is aligned on the left.

There is one em space from the longest item on the left side to the right side.

The first letter on the right-hand side is capitalized.

Each item ends with a period.

Do not use “is” or “the” at the beginning of items.

Do not use equality symbols between the left and right sides.

Equations in an item should be handled as follows.

When the equation is at the beginning of an item, align the equal sign with the right-hand side capitals, end the equation with a period, begin the definition with a capital, and end with a period.

When the equation is at the end of an item, end the definition with a comma, follow with an equal sign and the rest of the equation, then end with a period as shown in the following example.

Nomenclature

SPQ

Strictly proper pole constraints.

M

Minimal weighted sensitivity.

P(s)

Physical feedback.

W

Weighting.

Q

= P – 1. Improper function.

S, l

Signal density, = P, M.

NOTE: Acronyms defined in a Nomenclature list do not need to be defined again in the text. If the section headings are made up of only previously defined acronyms, we should continue to add the acronym in parentheses next to the definition, as it becomes unreadable otherwise.

Text Section Headings

Standard specifications have been established for Transactions text section headings. There are four levels of section headings with established specs: primary (section), secondary (subsect1), tertiary (subsect2), and quaternary (subsect3) heads.

Enumeration of section headings is desirable, but not required. Primary headings (section) are enumerated by Roman numerals, centered above text, and set in 10-pt. and 8-pt. caps. Note that Introduction, Conclusion, and Acknowledgment are Singular heads. 

Example:

I. Introduction

Secondary headings (subsect1) are enumerated by capital letters followed by periods (“A.,” “B.,” etc.), flush left, italic, upper and lowercase. 

Example:

Formal Frameworks

Tertiary headings (subsect2) are enumerated by Arabic numerals followed by parentheses. They are indented one em, run into the text in their sections, italic, upper and lowercase, and followed by a colon. 

Example:

Sophisticated Local Control: Sophisticated local control is applied when …

Quaternary headings (subsect3) are identical to tertiary headings, except that they are indented two ems instead of one em, lowercase letters are used as labels, and only the first letter of the heading is capitalized. 

Example:

Communication policies: Policies developed to improve communication …

Reference and Acknowledgment headings are unlike all other section headings in text. They are never enumerated. They are simply primary headings without labels, regardless of whether the other headings in the article are enumerated. 

Example:

References

Acknowledgment (note spelling here)

Appendix headings are a special case. The primary heading(s) in the Appendix or Appendixes are set according to the usual style, except that there is flexibility in the enumeration of the heading. Roman numerals as heading numbers (Appendix I) or letters (Appendix A) are acceptable. The Appendix is not preceded by a Roman numeral. Follow the rules given earlier for labeling subsidiary heads. Note that if there is only one Appendix in the article, leave the Appendix unnumbered and unnamed as is. (Appendix subheads should also not be enumerated in this case.) 

Examples:

Appendix

Appendix I

Proof of Theorem

Appendix A

Proof of Theorem

Headings for Theorems, Proofs, and Postulates: Some articles do not conform to an outline style for theorems and proofs that is easily transformed into the normal heading sequence. The preferred style is to set the head giving the theorem number as a tertiary heading (no Arabic numeral preceding) and the proof head as a quaternary head. This rule also applies to Lemmas, Hypotheses, Propositions, Definitions, Conditions, etc.

In-text references to text sections are written: “in Section II” or “in Section II-A” or “in Section II-A1.” Capitalize the word “Section.” Do not use the word “Subsection”; use “Section” and write out the complete citation. Note that there is no period in Section II-A1 to separate the subsections.

Introduction

Initial Cap or Drop Cap: In full-length articles and/or Editorials (but not in short papers), the first letter of the Introduction is set as an initial cap, two lines deep (drop cap). After the cap, the remaining characters of the word are capitalized, as well as another 1–2 words at most. Do not break up hyphenated words into cap and lowercase sections—extend the caps if necessary. If it is not possible to use the first word or character of the Introduction as an initial cap (i.e., if the article begins with a quotation mark), try rewriting the sentence. 

Text Equations

Consecutive Numbering: Equations within an article are numbered consecutively from the beginning of the article to the end. There are some Transactions in which numbering by section, e.g., (1.1), (1.2.1), (A1), is permitted.

Appendix Equations: Continued consecutive numbering of equations is best in the Appendix, but equation numbering that starts over with (A1), (A2), etc., for Appendix equations is permissible.

Hyphens and Periods: Hyphens and periods are accepted, if consistent in the article, e.g., (1a), (1.1), (1-1). 

Appendix

Refer to the Appendix in text as “given in the Appendix.” Note that the plural of Appendix is Appendixes. Also note that all figures and tables in the Appendixes must be labeled in consecutive order with the other figures in the article. 

Conflict of Interest

Conflict of Interest statements appear at the end of the article in its own section, prior to the Acknowledgment. Suggested/required wording may come from the author/EIC.

Ex:

CONFLICT OF INTEREST

The author declares that the research was conducted in the

    absence of any commercial or financial relationships that

                                                  could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

Acknowledgment

The placement of the Acknowledgment appears after the final text of the article, just before the References and after any Appendix(es). The spelling of the heading for the Acknowledgment section is always singular, with no “e” between the “g” and the “m.” As noted previously in the Text Headings section, the Acknowledgment head is a primary heading. Do not enumerate the Acknowledgment heading.

The use of content generated by artificial intelligence (AI) in an article (including but not limited to text, figures, images, and code) shall be disclosed in the acknowledgments section of any article submitted to an IEEE publication. The AI system used shall be identified, and specific sections of the article that use AI-generated content shall be identified and accompanied by a brief explanation regarding the level at which the AI system was used to generate the content. The use of AI systems for editing and grammar enhancement is common practice and, as such, is generally outside the intent of the above policy. In this case, disclosure as noted above is recommended.  An example of this wording is as follows:

Article

Fig. caption:  Graphic(s) created using AI-generation. For image credits, please see the Acknowledgment section of this article.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

Fig. X was created using <AI system used>.  <Brief explanation regarding the level at which the AI system was used to generate the content.>

When citing names within the Acknowledgment, drop Mr., Mrs., or Miss (list first initial and last name only). For Dr. or Prof., use the Dr. or Prof. title with each name separately; do not use plural Drs. or Profs. with lists of names.

Author contribution statements (also called credit statements) should be added in the Acknowledgment section and follow above acknowledgment style. Author contribution statements should typically follow “Lists in Text” format.

Example:

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

Author contributions are as follows.

A. Jones: Conceptualization; software; validation

B. Smith: Investigation; data curation; writing

All acknowledgments of financial support are placed in the first footnote/author affiliation (with a few exceptions of some Transactions).

Any acknowledgments of permission to publish and disclaimers to the content of the work made to/by the author’s employer may be added as an Acknowledgment section.

Write the Acknowledgment section in the third person. 

Personal notes such as family announcements, proposals, etc., should be deleted from the Acknowledgment.

References

A few guidelines related to the writing of references are summarized here. 

The numbering of references is employed by citing one reference per number. Every reference in a Transactions reference list should be a separate number entry. Use of one reference number to designate a group of references is not permitted.

Example:

[37] E. G. Bowen, Radar Days, Institute of Physics Publishing, 1987. The literature of WWII radar is vast. Among the most comprehensive references are L. Brown, A Radar History of World War II: Technical and Military Imperatives, Institute of Physics Publishing, 1999; S. Swords, Technical History of the Beginnings of Radar, Peter Perigrinus, 1986; H. Guerlac, Radar in World War II, Tomash Publishers, American Institute of Physics, 1987.

The References should be written as follows:

[37] E. G. Bowen, Radar Days. London, U.K.: Institute of Physics, 1987.

[38] L. Brown, A Radar History of World War II: Technical and Military Imperatives. London, U.K.: Institute of Physics, 1999.

[39] S. Swords, Technical History of the Beginnings of Radar. Stevenage, U.K.: Peregrinus, 1986.

[40] H. Guerlac, Radar in World War II. New York, NY, USA: Tomash Publishers/Amer. Inst. of Physics, 1987.

In the text, the following footnote would be added after the citation for ref. [37]:

“The literature of WWII radar is vast. Among the most comprehensive references are [38], [39], [40].”

Any references to the original refs. [38], [39], and [40] would be changed to [41], [42], and [43], respectively.

Footnotes or other words and phrases that are part of the reference format do not belong on the reference list. These full footnotes or extraneous phrases must always be removed from the list, changed into text or footnotes on the appropriate page, and the references renumbered (renumber reference citation in text as well). Even the words “For example” should not introduce references in the actual list, but should instead be included in parentheses in text (or in a footnote), followed by the reference number, i.e., “For example, see [5].”

Do not say “in reference [1] …”; rather, the text should be written to read simply, “in [1] …” The author’s name should not be included in a text reference with a number (i.e., “In Smith [1]”) and should be changed to “in [1]” except in such cases where the author’s name is integral to the understanding of the sentence (e.g., “Smith [1] reduced calculated time …”). Reference dates should not be used as reference identifiers and should be deleted in text except in rare cases where the date is somehow relevant to the article’s subject.

Do not refer to a specific figure of a reference or to a specific page or equation from a reference. To avoid confusion, rewrite phrases such as “in Fig. 2 of reference [1]” to the IEEE cross-reference notation “in [1, Fig. 2].” Similarly, rewrite phrases such as “in equation (8) of reference [1]” to be [1, eq. (8)]. Other phrases may be rewritten as [1, Sec. IV], [1, Th. 4.2], or [1, Ch. 3].

If listing the same reference more than once on the reference list, giving a new reference number for each page or part of the same source that is cited, these separate references should all be made into one reference and the separate citations of pages, equations, etc., should be made in text using the notation explained in the previous paragraph.

If a reference author’s name is mentioned in the text, check its spelling against the reference list.

Text Citation of Figures and Tables

Use of the Lena Image (EFFECTIVE 1 April 2024)

IEEE’s diversity statement and supporting policies such as the IEEE Code of Ethics speak to IEEE’s commitment to promoting an inclusive and equitable culture that welcomes all. In alignment with this culture and with respect to the wishes of the subject of the image, Lena Forsén, IEEE will no longer accept submitted papers which include the “Lena image.”

All first citations of figures and tables in the article must be in numerical order. Citations to figures in text always carry the abbreviation “Fig.” followed by the figure number. The abbreviation is used even when it begins a sentence. Figure footnotes should be placed as part of the caption.

Figures: The general style for captions is such that each caption number should be cited with the abbreviation “Fig.” and the number, followed by a period, an em space, and then the text of the caption. The first word of the caption should always be capitalized, regardless of any style that may be chosen to list caption parts (a), (b), etc., if included. If you are citing Fig. 1(a) and 1(b), the singular "Fig." is still used. In general, do not use A, An, or The at the beginning of a figure or table caption. 

Example:

Fig. 1. Theoretical  measured values of  n.

There are several acceptable styles for listing the parts of the figure in the caption. Be consistent within each article, but otherwise use whichever style is most convenient for the figure. Regardless of which caption notation is used, the citation of (a), (b), etc., should always appear before the corresponding caption part.

Examples:

Fig. 1. Intercomplex crosstalk characteristics. (a) Electrode transmission. (b) Interelectrode crosstalk.

Fig. 2. (a) Variation of effective mode index with time. (b) Step-index change.

Fig. 3. Output resistance as a function of channel doping for 1-m-long gate. (a) InGaAs and (b) InP JFETs with pinchoff voltage as a parameter.

Fig. 4. (a) and (b) Plain and side views, respectively, of the experimental setup used to measure the effective diffraction loss which can be achieved using the feedback technique.

Fig. 1. (a) Electrode transmission. (b) Interelectrode crosstalk.

If parts of a figure after reduction will run the length of more than one page, the full descriptive part of the caption should be cited with the first part of the figure followed by the corresponding caption for the part. On the subsequent pages, the word (Continued.) will be placed under the carryover parts of the figure followed by a repeat of the full descriptive part of the caption and the corresponding caption for the carryover parts.

Captions for Landscape/broadside figures: The text should appear below the figures and facing outward at all times.

Examples:

Fig. 6. True and estimated spectra for a real data sequence. (a) True spectrum.

Fig. 6. (Continued.)  True and estimated spectra for a real data sequence. (b) Estimated with the periodogram.

Tables: The general style for table captions is such that each caption number should be centered above the table with the label TABLE and the enumeration given in Roman numerals. The descriptive text of the caption should be centered directly below the table number caption

The descriptive text of the table caption does not contain a period at the end of the caption, although punctuation may be necessary within the caption itself. In general, table captions should be set as an inverted pyramid.

The style for listing the parts of a table in the caption and in text depends on whichever style is most convenient for the table. The most acceptable style is to follow the conventions for callouts of figures. 

Example:

TABLE I

Parameter Values

TABLE II

Optimal Wavelength as a Function of Polarizer Angle. (a) Wavelengthfor External Cavity. (b) Estimated Wavelength for Laser Diode

Obtaining permission to reuse copyrighted material

Reusing IEEE graphics previously published in IEEE publications: You will need to request permission directly from IEEEXplore. In most cases, the only requirements will be to give full credit to the original source and to obtain the author’s approval (as a courtesy to the author). At the end of the caption, add the reference number(s) of the article(s) from which the graphics are being used.

Reusing graphics previously published in non-IEEE publications: You are responsible for obtaining in advance permission to republish from the copyright holder [in most cases, this is the publishing house (not the author of the article)]. The wording is usually supplied by the publishing house itself. This text is added at the end of the caption.

Biographies

IEEE Transactions author biographies are generally divided into three paragraphs. However, if appropriate information for each paragraph is not available, the biography may be only one or two paragraphs. QR codes are not accepted in place of biographies and/or photographs (we will not send readers to a destination for which we cannot be confident of long-term accessibility).

Always defer to the pronoun or title provided by the author. If provided as “they” and “them,” do not change to be singular; these should be considered non-binary singular pronouns.

The biography begins with the author’s full name and IEEE membership history. The author’s name appears in boldface type and must match the byline. A nickname or maiden name may appear within parentheses, e.g., Sung-Mo (Steve) Kang or Jane (Smith) Jones, but not in the byline. List current IEEE membership only; this is written out in full and should match the byline exactly.

Note that affiliate memberships are neither listed in the byline nor biography membership history.

Abbreviations for IEEE membership grades are S (Student Member), GS (Graduate Student Member), A (Associate Member), M (Member), SM (Senior Member), F (Fellow), LA (Life Associate Member), LM (Life Member), LSM (Life Senior Member), and  LF (Life Fellow). Note that A stands for Associate, not Affiliate, Member. Affiliate memberships are not listed in the byline or biography membership history.

Do not include references to IEEE membership from the text of the biography.

Author photographs should be professional images of the head and shoulders. Current photographs are encouraged; baby and family photographs should not be used.

First Paragraph: The first paragraph may contain a place and/or date of birth (list place, then date). Next, the author’s educational background is listed. When listing degrees earned, the biography should state “[S]he received the Ph.D. degree from …” (not “[S]he received [her] his Ph.D. degree from …”). Always add the word “degree” after a degree title. Include the years degrees were received. Abbreviations for some common international and domestic degrees are:

Dipl.Ing., Diplom-Physiker, Dr. Ing., Dr. Phil., Dr. Eng., B.S., S.B., B.Sc.(Hons.), B.E.E., B.S.E., M.Eng., M.Sc.(tech.), M.S.E.E., M.S.E., Civilingenir, Lic.es Sci., Lic.es Lett.

Add the full locations (city, state, country) of universities and colleges the first time they are mentioned. For U.S. state-named universities, repeat the state name in the location, and include the country (e.g., University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, USA); for city-named universities, repeat the name of the city when giving the location (e.g., University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA). For universities outside the U.S., give locations with the name of the city (postal abbreviations of Canadian Provinces, if used) and the country the first time. 

Use lowercase for the author’s major field of study.

Second Paragraph: The second paragraph of the biography lists military and work experience, including summer and fellowship jobs and consultant positions. Job titles are capitalized. The current job must have a location (city, state, country); previous positions may be listed without one. Do not abbreviate city names, Company, Laboratory, or Department. Use standard names for all countries. If there is space, information the author provides about previous publications may be included at the end of this paragraph. Edit out long lists of published books or articles. Instead use the sentence “s(he) is the author of several books and numerous published articles.” The format for listing publishers of an author’s books within the biography is: Title of the Book (publisher name, year) similar to a reference. (Note, use the word “titled” not “entitled” to introduce the book [e.g., He is the author of the book titled Stochastic Analysis and Applications (Taylor & Francis, 2012)]. List author affiliations with non-IEEE journals. Note IEEE Transaction and Journal Titles should be in small caps; IEEE Magazine Titles should be in italics; and non-IEEE titles should be in italics. List previous and current research interests. Do not repeat the author’s name in the second paragraph; use the supplied pronoun.

Third Paragraph: The third paragraph begins with the author’s title and last name (e.g., Dr. Smith, Prof. Jones, Mr. Kajor, Ms. Hunter). It lists the author’s memberships in professional societies other than the IEEE and his or her status as a Professional Engineer if applicable. Finally, list awards and work for IEEE committees and publications, affiliation with other professional societies, and symposia.

Personal notes such as hobbies should not be included in the biography. Authors may include an external link to their work, this should appear as “For more information, see http://website.of.author” This should be the full URL and not an abbreviated link.

Examples:

Michael C. Author Jr. (Fellow, IEEE) was born in New York, NY, USA, in 1969. He received the B.S. degree in applied mathematics from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, in 1989, the M.S. degree in mathematical physics from Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA, in 1991, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA, in 1995.

From 1993 to 1995, he was with Raytheon Corporation, Bedford, MA, USA. From 1995 to 1996, he was with the General Electric Space Laboratory, Valley Forge, PA, USA. From 1996 to 1997, he was a Fulbright Lecturer at the University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain. He is currently an Associate Professor of electrical engineering at the University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA. His research has been concerned with reentry plasma effects and microwave diagnostics of plasmas.

Dr. Author is a Registered Professional Engineer in the State of Pennsylvania. For more information, see http://website.of.author.

Katsunari Okamoto was born in Hiroshima Prefecture, Japan, in 1949. He received the B.S. degree from Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ, USA, in 1979, and the M.S. degree from Monmouth University, Long Branch, NJ, USA, in 1984.

He was a Postdoctoral Fellow at the University of Tokyo, Japan, in 1978. He joined the Ibaraki Electrical Communication Laboratory, N.T.T., Ibaraki-ken, Japan, in 1979, where he was engaged in research on the optimum waveguide structure of optical fibers. At present, he is a Member of Technical Staff at Bellcore, Red Bank, NJ, USA.

Dr. Okamoto is a member of the Institute of Electronics and Communication Engineers of Japan.

Squibs

If the author chooses not to publish his/her biography and photograph, a squib is used. Example:

James A. Author (Fellow, IEEE), photograph and biography not available at the time of publication. 

If all authors of the article opt not to publish his/her biography and photograph, no squib is used.

C. Other Text 

Inclusive Language

To avoid the use of insensitive terms/phrases, please refer to the Inclusive Language Guide in the Appendix for replacement text. Use “people-first language,” i.e., the person has X; has been diagnosed with X; uses a X; etc.  More information can be found here. 

Footnotes

Footnotes should be numbered in consecutive order throughout the text. Each footnote should be a new paragraph. The footnote numbers are superscripts in text and in the actual footnotes. In text, place the superscript footnote numbers after punctuation such as periods, commas, parentheses, and quotation marks, but generally before dashes, colons, and semicolons in a compound sentence. The footnotes should be placed at the bottom of the text column in which they are cited.

Lists in Text

There are three types of lists in text: run-in lists, displayed lists, and where lists. The ordering of labeling for all lists is 1), 2), 3) followed by a), b), c), and then i), ii), iii). Note the single (ending) parenthesis. The order of indentation is 1 em, 2 ems, 3 ems.

Run-In Lists: Lists that run in with text must be grammatically correct. They must also be introduced by a colon, separated by semicolons, and have parallel construction. Example:

The carrier–phonon interaction matrices are given by: 1) polar optical phonons; 2) deformation potential optical phonons; and 3) piezoelectric acoustic phonons.

Displayed Lists: Lists that are displayed may be either incomplete sentence items or full sentence items. Incomplete sentence items contain a few items, are very short, are grammatically parallel, and are handled in two ways. If the items are not mentioned in the text or are fewer than three items, run in as shown in the example for run-in lists. If, however, the items are mentioned later in the text, introduce the item with a colon, number the items, begin the entry with a lowercase letter, and set block paragraph style. Use semicolons between items and a period at the end of the list. Example:

This operating scenario provides all of the contributors necessary to configure a resonant power distribution system:

 implementation of capacitor power factor correction on the power line;

 presence of nonlinear load;

 tuning of the power line by the load adjustments to a frequency present in the nonlinear generator.

Incomplete sentence items that are mentioned in text may also be formatted as shown in the example for full sentence items.

Example:

The three problems are related in the following sense:

1) Additional cost constraint;

2) Relaxation of the constraints is permitted;

3) Limited budget optimization is a general optimization problem.

Full sentence items may be introduced by “that” or other words taking object and end with a period. Number all items, start each entry with a capital letter, and end with a period. Example:

The synthesis is performed in three major steps.

 Geometry is generated for the selected module variants.

 Shape variants using different fold counts for resistors are generated for each module.

 Routing and postprocessing complete the final layout.

Where Lists: Where lists define variables in the equations preceding the list. They are characterized by incomplete sentences and follow the same rules as Nomenclature lists, with the following exceptions.

 There is no primary heading.

The left-hand side is indented one em space.

The first letter on the right-hand side is lowercase.

Each item ends with a semicolon (except for the last item, which ends with a period).

The lists are at least three items long; if fewer than three items, the list is generally run in paragraph form.

Example:

where

amplitude of supply voltage flicker;

angular frequency of supply voltage flicker;

supply voltage amplitude;

supply angular frequency.

Note the alignment of the equal sign with the right-hand side.

Lists having mixed items (start with an incomplete item, then have a full sentence explanation) are treated as a full sentence item list.

Dedication Line(s)

Dedication lines are usually run on the first page of an article, immediately above the Abstract. Example:  Dedicated to the work of J. W. Walters.

Note Added in Proof

One may wish to add a brief note in the proof stage, citing results obtained after acceptance of the article or mentioning additional references that have come to their attention since the article was accepted. This added information is usually inserted at the end of the Conclusion section of the article or in whatever section contains the last paragraph of the main body of the article. As long as the note is not a major change to the article or more than a few lines long, the addition generally does not require further review procedures. Use the tertiary heading “Note Added in Proof:” (run into text), but set in boldface italic with no enumeration and an em space indent. 

Examples:

Note Added in Proof: The author is an owner of the company which manufactured the tubes used in these experiments.

Note Added in Proof: Additional information about similar research can be found at www.newreseachresults.com.

D. Other Types of Papers

Editorials

This category of papers includes the various types of introductory papers, such as Editorials, Guest Editorials, Forewords, Introductions, and Editorial Announcements that appear at the beginning of issues as nontechnical introductory material. The Editorial may contain illustrations, citations, and references. Citations to articles in the issue should be listed as “Related Works” instead of in the reference section. It may contain a photograph and biography of each guest editor when it is a Guest Editorial for a special issue or section. An acknowledgment does not contain a heading. Note: In the Editorial, the Acknowledgment does not need to be written in third person and there is no Abstract. 

Title: An editorial may be titled simply “Editorial,” “Guest Editorial,” "Foreword,"“From the Editor," etc. However, if the editorial includes its own title, it should be preceded by the article type and a colon.

Example:

Guest Editorial: 

Emerging Topics of DC-DC Converters for Solar PV

Byline: Note that the byline for the Editorial does NOT appear below the title as it does in a full-length article. The name of the author of the Editorial or Foreword (usually the Editor or Guest Editor) (called “signature”) appears at the end of the Editorial. 

Example:

 Marvin K. Sain, Guest Editor

Department of Electrical Engineering

University of Illinois

Urbana, IL 60617 USA

Brief Papers

These articles contain Abstracts and an initial cap. The byline includes the membership grade. They do not contain biographies and photographs of the authors.

Short Papers, Letters, Correspondence, and Communications

Short papers are set up like full-length articles. The membership grade is not included in the byline. Author biographies and photographs are not included. Footnotes, captions, and references may be included.

Letters are a type of short paper that have a strict low page limit and appear at a back section of an issue. Note that these letters are not the same as research letters formatted as regular papers without biographies that make up entire volumes or issues (e.g., IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, IEEE Electron Device Letters, etc.).

Correspondence and communications also use the short paper format, but are typically only a few paragraphs in length. These include letters to the editor.

Comments and Replies

Comments are generally in response to a previously published article. The Comments and Author(s) Reply are short papers published together in that the “Reply” is in response to the Comments. These short items must include Abstracts and Index Terms. A special format applies for Comments and Author(s) Reply. Begin the first sentence with “In the above article [1], ...” Reference [1] is the commented article’s citation and will appear as Reference [1] in the References section.

Some publications refer to these articles as Discussions and Closures.

Example of the Comments:

Title: Comments on “Harmonics: The Effects on Power Quality and Transformers”

Byline: Keith H. Sueker

Footnote: 

Received 15 July 2006.

The author is with the School of Engineering, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235 USA (e-mail: k.sueker@ieee.org).

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JQE.2006.12345

NOTE: The footnote here relates back to the original article being commented upon. The title is not repeated.

Example of the Reply:

Title: Authors’ Reply

Byline: Robert D. Henderson and Patrick J. Rose

Footnote:

Received 3 October 2006; accepted 5 October 2006. Date of publication 2 November 2006; date of current version 25 November 2006.

The authors are with RDH Consultants, Inc., Charlotte, NC 28241 USA (e-mail: corresponding@author.com).

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JQE.2006.12348

Corrections/Errata/Addendums

The format for Corrections, Errata, and Addendums is basically the same as for the Comments, except that  Corrections/Errata/Addendums do not carry a Reply. Abstracts and Index Terms are optional. However, Abstracts and Index Terms should either both be present or both be absent. All run a copyright line. A Correction is a notice that makes note of an error by the author in their original writing. An Erratum is a notice of an error introduced by the publisher. An Addendum is an additional, short statement that relates to/supplements the published article. It should follow the standard format of a Correspondence.

Note: The plural form of the word is used in the title, even if there may be only one correction. All Corrections/Errata must carry the byline as the same form as the original article; this ensures that the two articles will be linked properly. IEEE will not republish the original article with the changes made; only the correction/erratum detailing the error(s) and resolution(s).

Example of a “Corrections” article:

Title: Corrections to “On the Exact Realization of LOG-Domain Elliptic Filters Using the Signal Flow Graph Approach”

Byline: Costas Psychalinos and Spiridon Vlassis

Footnote:

Received 1 May 2003.

The authors are with the Physics Department, Electronics Laboratory, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, GR-54124 Thessaloniki, Greece (e-mail: cpsychal@physics.auth.gr; svals@skiathos.physics.auth.gr).

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSII.2003.814788

Example of an Erratum:

Title: Erratum to “Harmonics: The Effects on Power Quality and Transformers”

Byline: Robert D. Henderson and Patrick J. Rose

Footnote:

Received 20 January 2004.

The authors are with RDH Consultants, Inc., Charlotte, NC 28241 USA (e-mail: pjrose@rdh.com).

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVLSI.2004.830244

Example of an Addendum:

Title: Addendum to “Harmonics: The Effects on Power Quality and Transformers”

Byline: Robert D. Henderson and Patrick J. Rose

Footnote:

Received 20 January 2004.

The authors are with RDH Consultants, Inc., Charlotte, NC 28241 USA (e-mail: pjrose@rdh.com).

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVLSI.2004.830244

Book Reviews

Some publications carry Book Reviews. They are the same as a short paper or correspondence; however, the title runs additional information about the book that is being reviewed. The title is separated from the book’s author by an em dash. Included in parentheses is the city of publication, publisher, date of publication, the total number of pages of the book, and the price. Outside of the parentheses is the reviewer’s name in italics. Some Transactions carry a short biography of the reviewer under the title. Book Reviews appear in the table of contents with a listing for both the author of the book and the reviewer. Example:

Title and Byline:

The Analysis and Design of Pneumatic Systems—B. L. Andersen. (New York: Wiley, 1987, 302 pp., $65.00.) Reviewed by J. L. Shearer.

First Footnote:

The reviewer is with the College of Engineering, Idaho State University, Pocatello, ID 83209 USA. Digital Identifier 0090-6778/TNN.2005.828433.

Table of Contents:

The Analysis and Design of Pneumatic Systems—B. L. Andersen .......Reviewed by J. L. Shearer 123

Obituaries/In Memoriam

Obituaries are usually run as the first page of an issue, like an Editorial. They are set up with the same specs as Editorials. 

E. Writing Style for Transactions

The following provides a summary of the most important style distinctions to be made in the writing of a Transactions article.

Acronyms

Define acronyms the first time they appear in the Abstract as well as the first time they appear in the body of the article, written out first as part of the sentence, followed by the acronym in parentheses. Widely used or familiar terms should be defined (see the Common Acronyms and Abbreviations list in the Appendix for some terms that must be defined the first time they are used in text). Acronyms do not need to be defined in the text if mentioned in the Nomenclature. Coined plurals or plurals of acronyms do not take the apostrophe as per Chicago Manual of Style. Example: FET (singular); FETs (plural).

Indefinite articles are assigned to abbreviations to fit the sound of the first letter: an FCC regulation; a BRI.

Spelling

Note that IEEE Transactions use the first spelling of a word as given in the main entry of The Merriam-Webster Dictionary.

British Spellings and Terminology: Change all British spellings to American spellings. In particular, watch for “our” endings in words like “behaviour” (change to “behavior”) and “re” endings in words like “centre” (change to “center”). Also watch for the use of “s” rather than “z” in words like “polarisation” (change to “polarization”). See “Common Hyphenations and Misspellings” in the Appendix.

Trademarks

The trademark symbols ™ and ® are no longer used. Capitalize the first letter in the trademark name only. The symbols ™ and ®, which often accompany registered trademark names on product packaging and in advertisements, need not be used in running text. Optionally, for the first occurrence of a trademarked product, a footnote superscript can be placed after the trademarked name, with a matching footnote that reads “Trademarked.” or “Registered trademark.”

Plurals

Plurals of units of measure take the “s.” For example, the plural form of 3 mil is 3 mils; 3 bits/s instead of 3 bit/s. The plural of calendar years do not take the apostrophe before the “s.” For example, the plural form of 1990 is 1990s.

Hyphenation Rules

For hyphenation and spelling guidelines, IEEE style follows: 1) the list of preferred spellings and hyphenated words can be found in the Appendix; 2) the guidelines discussed in the Grammar and Usage in Transactions section of this guide; and 3) the first version of the spelling given in the most recent edition of The Merriam-Webster Dictionary. Do not hyphenate most compound modifiers if they occur after the noun being modified, even if hyphenating them before the noun. 

Examples:

The plan was well prepared. The man was little known. The woman was better qualified. His boat was 42 feet long. 

He has a 42-foot-long boat. T was the data period of the 40-Gb/s data signal. The 160-GHz MLLD was a diode in which a 40-nm-long saturable absorber was located.

NOTE: Do not use the IEEE Standards Dictionary for hyphenation guidelines as no attempt is made there for consistency in hyphenation. The Standards Dictionary is quite useful for its definitions and acronyms list in its back section.

The most important hyphenation guideline is to be certain that the hyphenation for a particular word or group of adjectives is consistent within a particular article.

The En or Em Dash

The en dash represents the words “to,” “through,” or “and.” Use it between page numbers, figure citations, academic years, proper nouns, names, a range of values, or for opposites.

Examples:

pp. 10–15, 

1984–1990, 

Jones–Smith theorem, 

input–output, 

voltage–current curve, 

analog–digital converter, 

10–20 cm. 

Also, use the en dash in chemical abbreviations such as Ni–Al–Si. When using the en dash to represent a range, if the word “from” occurs, the word “to” must be used rather than an en dash (e.g., ranges from 5 to 50 times).

The em dash is used in ordinary writing to mark a suspension of the sense. It is also used like parentheses, to mark a subordinate thought within a sentence.

Grammar

Check closely for lapses of clarity, subject/verb agreement, and parallel clause construction. See the following examples:

Number:

A number of samples were taken …

A number N expressing the relation x/y is chosen …

Data:

The data were collected … (always plural)

Series:

A series of tests was run … (always singular with “a”)

Some, All, Half:

Some (all, half) of it is …

Some of them are …

For example: 

Use “all of” with another pronoun, such as “these” or “those,” and before singular nouns. For collective and plural nouns, use “all.”

Quantity:

Three volts were applied …

Four grams were added …

Contractions

Contractions such as “don’t” and “can’t” are not used in technical text. Change to “do not” and “cannot.”

Note: “don’t care,” “best-case,” and “worst-case” are allowed and used often in journals like TCAD.

Capitalization

In general, discourage capitalization in text except where absolutely necessary. For example, only proper names attached to the names of laws, principles, theorems, etc., get capitalized (Abel’s theorem, Newton’s first law, etc.). Computer commands are in computer tags and remain small caps; most computer languages (Cobol, Java, LISP, PERL, etc.) are upper and lowercase. Earth should be capitalized when referring to the planet.

Dates

Use the international date format for all dates in the article. Spell out the month. (Note: This does not include references. Continue to follow IEEE Reference Style.) 

4 June 2002

23-31 October 2019

3 November 2021–4 December 2021

 

Percentages and Decimals

Always use the number and the percent sign when dealing with percentages. The percentage symbol is repeated in lists and ranges. 

Only 2% of the transformers failed the test.

The students made up 20%-30% of the population.

When using decimal fractions in text, include the zero before decimal if needed for clarity, otherwise omit it. Do not include the zero(s) after the last digit following a decimal:

.25

0.8

Ranges With Units

When reporting ranges, there should be no unit after each number unless the units are different:

40–50 mm

50 inches to 7 feet

2 × 5 cm

Math

Some brief guidelines for writing math are explained here. 

Variables are set italic; vectors are usually boldface italic.

Remove commas around variables in text.

Always add a zero before decimals, but do not add after (e.g., 0.25).

Check the use of the parentheses and brackets i.e., [0,1).

Spell out units used in text without quantities (e.g., “where the noise is given in decibels”). For units appearing with quantities, use the standard abbreviations listed in the Table of Units and Quantity Symbols in the Appendix, and units used as compound adjectives may be hyphenated only if needed for clarity: 10-kV voltage, 5-in-thick glass. Do not insert a hyphen when they are not used as adjectives: a current of 2 A, a line 4 in long, a length of 3.05 mm.

Always use a regular space and not a thin space between numbers and units in text.

Use thin spaces instead of commas between numbers in tens or hundreds of thousands (e.g., 62 000, 100 000, but 4000).

Always make sure µ is µm, “micron” is “micrometer,” “submicron” is submicrometer.” Always change cycle per second to hertz (Hz); cycle per second may not appear as cycle, cps, c/s, csec. 

In text, fractions may be broken down (shilled) multiline (built-up) so they can be placed on one line. Sometimes parentheses may need to be added to distinguish between expressions, especially when a minus appears [e.g.,  becomes ],  becomes [(c-d)/(k+4)]. This may be done to save space, but is not a necessity.

In exponential expressions [e.g., ], there are sometimes long and complicated superscripts. These may be brought down in line with the substitution of “exp” for “e” and the addition of square brackets (e.g., exp[–(jwt)xyzk]).

Distinguish between lowercase italic “ell” or “oh” versus one and zero.

Always use numerals for numbers written with units. Otherwise, spell out numbers below 11, and use numerals for others unless they begin a sentence or are combined in a phrase (gives 7 to 13 times more).

Use zeroth, first, nth, (k + 1)th, not 1st, 2nd, (k + 1)st, etc.

Use the word “Equation” at the start of a sentence, but in text, just use the number [e.g., in (1)].

Use the $ symbol versus “dollars” in sums of money.

The slash (/) is acceptable in place of the word “per” when it lends to the clarity of the sentence. For example: “the ratio of 16 samples/s to 35 samples/s as compared to …”

Ellipses: In mathematics, you may use dots (ellipses) to show continuation in an expression (e.g., x2, ..., x16). The type of mathematical expression will determine whether the ellipses points are set on the baseline or centered. If commas or operational signs are present, they are placed after each term and after the three ellipses points. If operational signs are used, the ellipses are centered on the operator. When commas are used, the ellipses are on the baseline. Example:

x1, x2, …, xn  not x1, x2 … xn

x1 + x2 + … + xn  not x1 + x2 + … xn

y = 0, 1, 2, … not y = 0, 1, 2 …

x1x2 … an not x1x2 … an

Conditions: In displayed equations, a comma or parentheses and a two-em space is inserted between the main expression and the condition following it. Example:

NOTE: There is no comma before a for all “” symbol.

Compound Units: Compound units should be separated by a center dot (e.g., 4 V · s), but a slash may be used since this has a different meaning (for instance, 6 V/s means volts per second). It is also possible to use a negative power to put a unit in the denominator: cm/s2 = cm · s–2. Parentheses may be used to clarify a unit: g/(cm · s) or g · cm–1 · s–1.

Use of Periods and Commas: Equations which conclude a sentence should end with a period. The only time punctuation is used to lead into an equation is when the lead-in text is a complete sentence. Example:

where we had the following:

x = Y + Z.

or where, i.e.,

x = Y + Z.

Commas appearing at the ends of equations are deleted unless they are critical to the punctuation of the sentence containing the equation. 

Equation Numbers

Equation numbering should be consecutive, should appear flush right on line with the last line of an equation, should not have repeats or missing numbers, and should use a correct numbering style.

Displayed Equations

Material in displayed equations is automatically italic unless you indicate otherwise. Some simple general rules apply. All variables are italic. Function names and abbreviations are Roman, as are units, unit abbreviations, complete words, and abbreviations of words. Superscripts and subscripts follow this same formula: when they are variables, they are italic; when they are abbreviations of words (such as “in” and “out” for input and output), they are Roman. Single-letter superscripts and subscripts may be italic even if they are abbreviations, unless this leads to inconsistency between italic and Roman characters for similar types of subscripts.

F. General Layout Rules

Figures and tables are placed at the tops of columns as close to their first mention as possible, but preferably after the mention.

Figures and tables progress vertically, not horizontally, on pages.

Footnotes must appear at the bottom of the column where they are first mentioned.

III. GRAMMAR AND USAGE IN TRANSACTIONS

A. Rules of Grammar

The principles of style below focus on fundamentals of modern usage. Particular emphasis is given to the rules most commonly violated.

Form the possessive singular of nouns by adding “s” (Avogadro’s theorem). Follow this rule unless the final consonant is an s (Burns’ theorem). Possessive pronouns (hers, its, yours, theirs, ours) have no apostrophe. Indefinite pronouns use the apostrophe to show possession (someone’s rule). Contractions use an apostrophe (it’s for …; it is). Possessives do not (its losses).

In a series of three or more terms, use a comma immediately before the coordinating conjunction (usually and, or, or nor).

Enclose parenthetic expressions between commas (Improvement, as shown in Fig. 1, is attained by the addition of the cogeneration). Brief phrases or single words, such as however, may or may not be parenthetic (such connectives at the head of a sentence are more commonly left unpunctuated). The commas may be omitted if the interruption to the flow of the sentence is slight. In this case, never omit one comma and leave the other. Remember that many seemingly single commas stand for a pair. Clauses or phrases at the beginning or end of sentences do not look parenthetical, but often they might just as well be placed in the middle, in which case they would be found punctuated at both ends. At the beginning of a sentence, such an element is set off by what should be thought of as the second comma in a pair. For instance, note the three possible positions illustrating a parenthetical element of this kind: However the sum may later change, it is calculated now/The sum is calculated now, however it may later change/The sum, however it may later change, is calculated now. In all three examples, the meaning remains constant; the single commas of the first and second sentences have the same parenthetical function as the paired commas of the third.

Parenthetic material such as dates take the comma(s) as follows: 14 February 1996 or April to June 1996 or Saturday, 9 March 1996.

The abbreviations etc., i.e., and e.g., are parenthetic and use the comma as follows: cables, transformers, etc., are needed. Abbreviations for academic degrees, titles following a name, and certain restrictive terms of identification should be punctuated as follows:

Robert D. Lorenz, Ph.D.

Ian T. Wallace, Member, requests that…

E. A. Brockmann Jr. states that…

Restrictive clauses are not parenthetic and are not set off by commas: The proof that (or which) (restrictive clause should be “that” while nonrestrictive is “which”; “who” can be restrictive or nonrestrictive, depending on how it is used) is given in this section is not complete.

Nonrestrictive clauses are parenthetic and are set off by commas: The address i, which is the starting address of the message, is then transferred to a queue list on the processing part …

The nonrestrictive clause always takes “which” and is surrounded by commas. The restrictive clause can take “that” or “which”; “that” is preferred.

A semicolon is used to link two independent clauses with no connecting words. You can also use a semicolon to join two independent clauses together with one of the following conjunctive adverbs: however, moreover, therefore, consequently, otherwise, nevertheless, thus, etc.

Use a colon after an independent clause to introduce a list.

Punctuation always goes inside quotation marks, except for the colon and semicolon. Use single quotation marks around quotes within quotes. Quotes may be used around a new or special usage of a term the first time only, but use of quotes in this manner should be kept to a minimum.

Direct quotes should be set in quotation marks in roman font. Text should not be in italics.

Do not use double parentheses in text expressions, but keep them in math. For example, (see (10)) should become [see (10)].

All acronyms and numerical plurals do not use apostrophes, i.e., FETs, 1980s (Note: Some exceptions may apply in mathematical writing.)

Compound nouns made from a one-syllable verb and a short adverb are one word when found that way in the dictionary (setup, takeoff, breakup). Compound nouns are likely to be two words, without a hyphen, or one word (bandwidth, bypass, flowchart, phase shift, sideband, standing wave). Compound nouns of more than two words can be hyphenated.

A pair of words, modifying a third word separately, does not get a hyphen (a tall water tower, a hot metal cylinder). If the first word modifies the second, and the pair together modify the third, there is a hyphen between the pair (a highfrequency signal, a secondorder equation). The exception to this is the adverb ending in “ly,” which needs no hyphen to join it to the next word.

A hyphen is not used after the comparative or the superlative (a higher order equation, a worst case value, nearest neighbor method). Do not hyphenate chemical compounds (sodium chloride crystals). Alloys and mixtures take the en dash (Ni–Co, He–Ne laser).

Do not use commas between adjectives (a planar equiangular spiral antenna).

Do not hyphenate predicate adjectives (… is well known, …is second order). 

If you are unsure, check The Merriam-Webster Dictionary to see if words are hyphenated.

Compound verbs are generally hyphenated (arc-weld, freeze-dry). Keep the hyphen when using the participles of such verbs as adjectives (freezedried, arcwelded). However, verbs with up, out, down, off, on, etc., do not have a hyphen, although the nouns formed from them may be hyphenated or one word (verb: set up, break down, read out; noun: setup, breakdown, readout).

Words Often Confused

Affect: to change or modify (verb).

Effect: result (noun); cause (verb).

Alternate: a substitute.

Alternative: a matter of choice.

Among: involves more than two things.

Between: involves more than two things, but considers each individually.

Compare to: point out resemblances between different objects.

Compare with: point out similarities and differences between same objects.

Compose: to make up or form: a set composed of members.

Comprise: to be made up of; to be formed by: a set comprising members; members comprising a set.

Farther: distance.

Further: quantity.

Fewer: modifies plural nouns specifying countable units, e.g., fewer tubes.

Less: modifies singular mass nouns and singular abstract nouns, e.g., less air.

Imply: something suggested though not expressed.

Infer: something deduced from evidence.

Number: used when objects can be counted: a large number of people.

Amount: used when objects cannot be counted: a large amount of water.

Principal: chief, main, most important (adjective).

Principle: a rule (noun).

Precede: come before.

Proceed: continue, advance.

That: (defining, restrictive).

Which: (nondefining, nonrestrictive)

IV. APPENDIX

A. Some Common Acronyms and Abbreviations

NOTE: Asterisks (*) indicate terms which must be defined the first time they are used in text. Other terms listed here may be used without definition. 

#

1-D

one-dimensional

2-D

two-dimensional

3-D

three-dimensional

4-D

four-dimensional

A

ac

alternating current

A–D, A/D

analog-to-digital

AF

audio frequency*

AFC

automatic frequency control*

AGC

automatic gain control*

AM

amplitude modulation

APD

avalanche photodiode

AR

antireflection*

ARMA

autoregressive moving average*

ASIC

application-specified integrated circuit*

ASK

amplitude shift keying

ATM

asynchronous transfer mode

av

average (subscript)*

avg

average (function)

AWGN

additive white Gaussian noise*

B

B–E

base–emitter source

BER

bit error rate*

BPSK

binary phase-shift keying

BWO

backward-wave oscillator*

C

c.c.

complex conjugate (in equations)

CCD

charge-coupled device*

CDMA

code division multiple access*

CD-ROM

compact disk read-only memory

CIM

computer integrated manufacturing*

CIR

carrier-to-interference ratio*

CMOS

complimentary metal–oxide–semiconductor

CPFSK

continuous phase frequency-shift keying*

CPM

continuous phase modulation*

CPSK

continuous phase-shift keying*

CPU

central processing unit

CRT

cathode-ray tube

CT

current transformer*

CV

capacitance–voltage

CW

continuous wave*

D

dc

direct current

DC

directional coupler

DF

direction finder*; deuterium fluoride; degree of freedom*

DFT

discrete Fourier transform*

DMA

direct memory access*

DPCM

differential pulse code modulation*

DPSK

differential phase-shift keying*

E

EDP

electronic data processing

EHF

extremely high frequency*

ELF

extremely low frequency*

EMC

electromagnetic compatibility*

EMF

electromotive force*

EMI

electromagnetic interference*

ems

expected value of mean square*

F

FDM

frequency division multiplexing*

FDMA

frequency division multiple access*

FET

field-effect transistor

FFT

fast Fourier transform*

FIR

finite-impulse response*

FM

frequency modulation

FSK

frequency-shift keying*

FTP

file transfer protocol

FWHM

full-width at half-maximum*

G

GUI

graphical user interface

H

HBT

heterojunction bipolar transistor

HEMT

high-electron mobility transistor

HF

high frequency

HTML

hypertext markup language

HV

high voltage

HVdc

high voltage direct current

I

IC

impedance compensation*; integrated circuit

ID

inside diameter; induced draft*; interdigital*

IDP

integrated data processing*

IF

intermediate frequency

IGFET

insulated-gate field-effect transistor

i.i.d.

independent identically distributed*

IM

intermediate modulation

IMPATT

impact ionization avalanche transit time (diode)

I/O, I–O

input–output

IR

infrared

IR

current-resistance

ISI

intersymbol interference

I–V

current–voltage

J

JFET

junction field-effect transistor

JPEG

Joint Photographers Expert Group

L

LAN

local area network

LC

inductance–capacitance

LED

light-emitting diode

LHS

left-hand side*

L–I

light output–current

LMS

least mean square

LO

local oscillator*

LP

linear programming*

LPE

liquid phase epitaxy*

LR

inductance–resistance

M

MESFET

metal–semiconductor field-effect transistor

MF

medium frequency*

MFSK

minimum frequency-shift keying

MHD

magnetohydrodynamics

MIS

metal–insulator–semiconductor

MLE

maximum-likelihood estimator*

MLSE

maximum-likelihood sequence estimator*

MMF

magnetomotive force

MMIC

monolithic microwave integrated circuit*

MoM

method of moments*

MOS

metal–oxide–semiconductor

MOSFET

metal–oxide–semiconductor field-effect transistor

MOST

metal–oxide–semiconductor transistor

MPEG

Motion Pictures Expert Group

N

NA

numerical aperture*

NIR

near infrared response*

NMR

nuclear magnetic resonance*

n-p-n

(diode)

NRZ

nonreturn to zero*

O

OD

outside diameter

OEIC

optoelectronic integrated circuit*

OOP

object-oriented programming

P

PAM

pulse-amplitude modulation*

PC

personal computer

PCM

pulse-code modulation*

pdf

probability density function*

PDM

pulse-duration modulation*

PF

power factor*

PID

Proportional-integral differential

p-i-n, p-n-p

(diode)

PLL

phase-locked loop*

PM

phase modulation*

PML

perfectly matched layer

pp, p–p

peak-to-peak*

PPM

pulse-position modulation*

PRF

pulse-repetition frequency*

PRR

pulse-repetition rate*

PSK

phase-shift keying*

PTM

pulse–time modulation

p.u.

per unit*

PWM

pulse width modulation*

Q

Q

quality factor; figure of merit

QoS

quality of service

QPSK

quaternary phase-shift keying

R

RAM

random access memory

RC

resistance–capacitance

R&D

research and development

RF

radio frequency

RFI

radio frequency interference*

RHS

right-hand side*

RIN

relative intensity noise*

RL

resistance–inductance

rms

root mean square

ROM

read-only memory

RV

random variable

S

SAW

surface acoustic wave*

SGML

standard generalized markup language

SHF

super high frequency*

SI

International System of Units; severity index*

SIR

signal-to-interference ratio

S/N, SNR

signal-to-noise ratio

SOC

system-on-a-chip*

SSB

single sideband*

SW

short wave*

SWR

standing-wave ratio*

T

TDM

time-division modulation*; time-division multiplexing*

TDMA

time-division multiple access*

TE

transverse electric

TEM

transverse electromagnetic

TFT

thin-film transistor*

TM

transverse magnetic

TVI

television interference*

TWA

traveling-wave amplifier*

U

UHF

ultrahigh frequency

UV

Ultraviolet

V

VCO

voltage-controlled oscillator*

VHF

very high frequency*

V–I

voltage–current

VLF

very low frequency*

VLSI

very large scale integration*

W

WAN

wide area network

WDM

wavelength division multiplexing*

B. Common Hyphenations and Misspellings

A

a posteriori

a priori

Abelian

accommodate

acknowledgment

acoustoelectric

acoustooptical

ad hoc

ad hoc networks

adder

aerospace

aftereffect

airborne

all-pass (adj)

Alnico

alphameric

alphanumeric

analog (not analogue)

appendixes

arc-back (n, adj)

arc-over (n, adj)

axle

B

back EMF

back-end (adj)

backscatter

[band-letter(s)]-band (adj.)

(e.g., X-band)

band-limited (adj)

bandpass

band-shared (adj)

bandwidth

bang-bang

base–emitter [en dash]

base–collector [en dash]

baseband

baseline

Bayes’ rule

beamwidth

Bernoulli polynomial

Bessel function

bimetallic

biomedical

blackbody

Boltzmann’s constant

Boolean algebra

broadband 

bulk–source [en dash]

bus (not buss)

bypass

C

Cartesian

Cascade

cascode

Cauchy’s inequality

Chebyshev 

(not Tchebbycheff)

chi-square

Clebsch–Gordan coefficient

coauthor (also, coworker)

coax (coaxial)

collinear (not colinear)

continuous-time (adj)

coset

costate

Coulomb wave function

counterclockwise

counterexample

coworker

coupled-mode (adj)

cross correlation

crossover

cross section

cross-sectional (adj)

crosstalk

cutoff

cybersecurity

D

database

deadtime (or dead time)

debug, debugged

Debye temperature

Dewar

diagramed

dielectric

diesel

digamma function

Dirac

discretization

discusser

Doppler

drain–source [en dash]

dropout

dyadic

E

eccentricity

eigenfunction

eigenvalue

eigenvector

elastance

elastooptical

electrooptic

elliptical coordinates

elliptic integrals

emitter–bulk [en dash]

end-effector

endfire

endpoint

et al.

Euler function

exponentiate

F

fan-in

fan-out

far-field (adj)

fast Fourier transform

feedback

feedback-free (adj)

first-order (adj)

flat-band

flip-flop

flowchart

flowmeter

flowthrough

fold (twofold, n-fold)

foreword

formulas (not formulae)

forward scatter

4-vector

front-end (adj)

Fresnel

G

gate–source [en dash]

gate–drain [en dash]

gauge (not gage)

Gaussian distribution

Gegenbauer

gimbaled

gradient

(the) Green’s function

Gudermannian

H

half-angle

half-plane

half-space

half-wave

halfway

Hankel function

Heaviside

Hermite

Hermitian

Hertzian

higher order (adj)

high-order (adj)

high-pass (adj)

hookup

hydroelectric

I

iff (if and only if)

imbalance (n)

inasmuch as

indexes (plural of index)

indices (plural used in math)

infrared

inhomogeneous

input, inputted

input–output [en dash]

in situ

insofar as

in vitro

in vivo

integer

integral

integrand

integrator

integro-differential

Internet

Itô

J

Jacobian

Jacobi’s polynomials

K

Kronecker delta

L

Lagrange

Lagrangian

Laguerre polynomial

Lame’s transform

Laplace transform

Laplacian

Laurent series

left-hand side

leftmost

Legendre

Leibnitz (or Leibniz)

leveled

lightweight

like (suffix, close up)

line shape

lineup

linewidth

lockout

log-likelihood (adj)

lookup table

loudspeaker

lower order (adj)

low-order (adj)

low-pass (adj)

Lur’e

Lurie

Lyapunov (not Liapunov)

M

macro (noun)

magnetohydrodynamics

magnetooptic

main lobe

makeup

manhole

man-hour

man-made

manpower

Markov process

m-ary

Mathieu’s equation

matrices

mean-square

mid (prefix) close up

midband

midline

midplane

midpoint

miniscule

missile

modem

modulo (mod)

modulus

monotonic 

monotonically

monotonicity

Mossbauer

m-sequence (noun)

multi (prefix) usually one word

multithreshold

Mylar

N

narrowband (adj)

n-ary

nearby

near-field (adj)

neoprene

Neumann

n-junction

n-layer

non (prefix) one word

non-Euclidean

non-Gaussian

non-Hermitiannonnegative

non-Stokes’

nonzero

NP-hard

nth-order (adj)

n-tuple

n-type

n-well

O

ohmmeter

one-dimensional (adj)

ored, oring

on-off

output, outputted

overall (adj)

P

parameterization

particle

passband

percent

Permalloy

Perspex

phaselength

phase shift

phasewidth

photoelectric

photoetch

photoresist

pickup

piecewise linear

piezoelectricity

p-i-n

pinchoff

p-junction

Planck’s constant

p-n junction

p-n-p (not PNP)

p^+-n-p^++

Poisson distribution

positive definite

postmultiplication

pothead

potline

powerhouse

power plant

preceding

premultiplication

printout

proceeding

programmed

proof (suffix) one word

propagation

pseudo (prefix) one word

pseudorandom

p-type

pull-in

pull-out

pulselength

pulse shape

pulsewidth

punchthrough

p-well

Q

quadratic

quarter-wave

quartic

quasi- (prefix) hyphen

quaternary

Q value

R

radioactive

radio-astronomic

radio astronomy

radio frequency

random access (adj)

readback

read head

readin (noun)

readout (noun)

real-valued (adj)

reentry

reexamine

Riccati

Riemann

right-hand side

rise time

root-mean-square (adj)

roundoff (adj)

Runge–Kutta

S

saddle point

scalar (magnitude)

scaler (machine)

scalor (rare)

self- (prefix) hyphen

self-adjoint

semi (prefix) usually one word

semi-infinite

servo (servomechanism)

servo amplifier

-shaped (hyphen)

sideband

sidelobe

signaling

slip ring

slow wave

so-called

solid-state (adj)

space-time

special-purpose (adj)

spirule

state of the art (noun)

state-variable (adj)

step-down

step-up

Stirling numbers

Stokes’

stopband

straightforward

strain gauge

Struve’s function

Sturm–Liouville [en dash]

suboptimum

subproblem

succeeding

successive

summable, asummable

supercoding

supermartingale

supersede

switchgear

switchyard

T

table lookup

takeoff

Taylor expansion

Tchebbyscheff 

(use Chebyshev)

Teflon

Teletype

teletypewriter

tensor

thin-film (adj)

threefold

3-space

throughput

time dependence

time-varying (adj)

tradeoff

traveling

two-port (or 2-port)

two’s complement

-type (hyphen)

U

ultrahigh frequency

ultrasonic

ultraviolet

unbalance (verb)

V

Van de Graaf

van der Waals

vector

versus

vertical

vertices

W

watthour meter

wattmeter

waveband

waveform

wavefront

wave function

waveguide

wavelength

wavenumber

wave shape

wave vector

wideband

wide-sense (adj)

widespread

wise (suffix) one word

worldwide

worst case (adj)

write head

X

x-axis

x-direction

X-ray (adj)

xy plane

Y

Yagi

Z

Zener diode

zero-input (adj)

zero-sum (adj)

zeroth-order (adj)

z transform

C. Table of Units and Quantity Symbols

NOTE: Asterisks (*) indicate SI units, preferred multiples of SI units, or other units acceptable for use with SI.

Unit

Unit

Symbol

Sometimes Occur as: 

(do not use)

Applications and Notes

Quantity Symbol 

(for use as variables, etc.)

*ampere

A

amp, a

SI unit of electric current.

I

U

F

ampere-hour

Ah

amp-hr

Also A · h.

*ampere (turn)

A

At

SI unit of magnetomotive force.

F

*ampere per meter

A/m

SI unit of magnetic fieldstrength.

A

H

ångström

Å

Å

Å Δ 10-10 m.

Deprecated (see ANSI/IEEEStd 268-1992).

atmosphere, standard

atm

atm Δ 101 325 Pa.

Deprecated (see ANSI/IEEEStd 268-1992).

atmosphere, technical

at

at Δ kgf/cm2.

Deprecated (see ANSI/IEEE Std 268-1992).

*atomic mass unit (unified)

u

The (unified) atomic mass unit is defined as one-twelfth of the mass of an atom of the carbon-12 nuclide. Use of the old atomic mass unit (amu), defined by reference to oxygen, is deprecated.

*atto

a

SI prefix for 10-18.

*attoampere

aA

bar

bar

b, barye

bar Δ 100 kPa. Use of the bar is strongly discouraged (see ANSI/IEEE Std 268-1992). Except for limited use in meteorology.

barn

b

b Δ 10-28 m2.

barrel

bbl

bbl = 42 galUS = 158.99 L.

This is the standard barrel used for petroleum and petroleum products. Different standard barrels are used for other commodities.

barrel per day

bbl/d

baud

Bd

baud (w/prefix)

In telecommunications, a unit of signaling speed equal to one element per second. The signaling speed in bauds is equal to the reciprocal of the signal element length in seconds.

1/τ

bel

B

b

*becquerel

Bq

SI unit of activity of a radionuclide.

billion electronvolts

GeV

bev, BeV

The name gigaelectronvolt is preferred for this unit.

bit

b

In information theory, the bit is a unit of information content equal to the information content of a message, the a priori probability of which is one-half. In computer science, the name bit is used as a short form of binary digit.

bit per second

b/s

British thermal unit

Btu

byte

B

A byte is a string of bits, usually eight bits long, operated on as a unit. A byte is capable of holding one character set.

calorie (International Table)

calIT

Δ calIT 4.1868 J. Deprecated (see ANSI/IEEE Std 268-1992).

calorie (thermochemical)

cal

Δ cal 4.1840 J. Deprecated (see ANSI/IEEE Std 268-1992).

*candela

cd

SI unit of luminous intensity.

I

candela per square inch

cd/in2

Use of the SI unit cd/m2 is preferred.

*candela per square meter

cd/m2

nit

SI unit of luminance.

L

candle

cd

The unit of luminous intensity has been given the name candela. Use of the name candle for this unit is deprecated.

*centi

c (prefix)

SI prefix for 10-2.

*centimeter

cm

centipoise

cP

cP Δ mPa · s. The name centipoise is deprecated (see ANSI/IEEE Std 268-1992).

centistokes

cSt

cSt Δ mm2/s. The name centistokes is deprecated (see ANSI/IEEE Std 268-1992).

*circular mil

cmil

cmil Δ (π/4) · 10-6in2.

*coulomb

C

c

SI unit of electric charge.

Q

*cubic centimeter

cm3

cc

Volume. (Preferred SI unit multiple.)

cubic foot

ft3

cubic foot per minute

ft3/min

cfm

cubic foot per second

ft3/s

cubic inch

in3

*cubic meter

m3

*cubic meter per second

m3/s

cubic yard

yd3

curie

Ci

C

Ci Δ 3.7 x1010 Bq. A unit of activity of a radionuclide. Use of the SI unit, the becquerel, is preferred.

cycle per second

Hz

c/s, cps, c/sec, cycle

See hertz.

darcy

D

D Δ cP·(cm/s)·(cm/atm) = 0.986923 µm2. A unit of permeability of a porous medium. By traditional definition, a permeability of one darcy will permit a flow of 1 cm3/s of fluid of 

1 cP viscosity through an area of 1 cm2 under a pressure gradient of 1 atm/cm. Deprecated (see ANSI/IEEE Std 268-1992).

day

d

day Δ 24 h.

deci

d (prefix)

SI prefix for 10-1.

decibel

dB

db, DB

degree (plane angle)

···°

deg

degree (temperature)

degree Celsius

°C

degree centigrade

SI unit of Celsius temperature. The degree Celsius is a special name for the kelvin, used in expressing Celsius temperatures or temperature intervals.

t

degree Fahrenheit

°F

Note that the symbols for °C, °F, and °R are comprised of two elements, written with no space between the ° and the letter that follows. The two elements that make the complete symbol are not to be separated.

degree kelvin

K

See kelvin.

degree Rankine

°R

deka

da

SI prefix for 10.

dyne

dyn

dyne

dyn Δ 10-5 N. Deprecated (see ANSI/IEEE Std 268-1992).

F

*electronvolt

eV

ev

erg

erg

erg Δ 10-7 J. Deprecated (see ANSI/IEEE Std 268-1992).

exa

E

SI prefix for 1018.

exbi

Ei

Prefix for 260.

*farad

F

f, fd

SI unit of capacitance.

C

*femto

f

SI prefix for 10-15.

femtometer

fm

foot

ft

ft Δ 0.3048 m.

foot of water

ftH2O

ftH2O = 2989.1 Pa. (ISO).1

foot per minute

ft/min

fpm

foot per second

ft/s

fps, ft/sec

foot per second squared

ft/s2

foot pound-force

ft · lbf

footcandle

fc

fc Δ lm/ft2. The name lumen per square foot is also used for this unit. Use of the SI unit of illuminance, the lux (lumen) per square meter, is preferred.

footlambert

fL

fL Δ (1/π) cd/ft2. A unit of luminance. One lumen per square foot leaves a surface whose luminance is one footlambert in all directions within a hemisphere. Use of the SI unit, the candela per square meter, is preferred.

gal

Gal

Gal Δ cm/s. Deprecated (see ANSI/IEEE Std 268-1992).

gallon

gal

1 galUK = 4.5461 L.

1 galUS Δ 231 in3 = 3.7854 L.

gauss

G

The gauss is the electromagnetic CGS unit of magnetic flux density. Deprecated (see ANSI/IEEE Std. 268-1992).

B

gibi

Gi

Prefix for 230.

*giga

G

kM

SI prefix for 109.

gigabyte

GB

GB Δ 109 B.

*gigaelectronvolt

GeV

bev, BeV

*gigahertz

GHz

kMHz, KMC, Gc/s

1The term “(ISO)” means that the definition is from ISO 31.

gilbert

Gb

The gilbert is the electromagnetic CGS unit of magnetomotive force. Deprecated (see ANSI/IEEE Std 268-1992).

grain

gr

gr Δ lb/7000.

*gram

g

gm

m

gram per cubic centimeter

g/cm3

*gray

Gy

SI unit of absorbed dose in the field of radiation dosimetry.

*hecto

h

SI prefix for 102.

*henry

H

Hy, hy

SI unit of inductance.

LP, Pm

*hertz

Hz

cps, c/s, cycle

SI unit of frequency.

f , νB

horsepower

hp

hp Δ 550 ft · lbf/s = 746 W. The horsepower is an anachronism in science and technology. Use of the SI unit of power, the watt, is preferred.

*hour

h

hr

inch

in

in.

in Δ 2.54 cm.

inch of mercury

inHg

inHg = 3386.4 Pa (ISO).

inch of water

inH2O

inH2O = 249.09 Pa (ISO).

inch per second

in/s

ips

*joule

J

SI unit of energy,work,and quantity of heat.

EWQ

*joule per kelvin

J/K

SI unit of heat capacity and of entropy.

S

kelvin

K

In 1967, the CPGM gave the name kelvin to the SI unit of temperature, which had formerly been called degree kelvin, and assigned it the symbol K (without the symbol °).

kibi

Ki

Prefix for 210.

*kilo

k

SI prefix for 103. The symbol k shall not be used for kilo. The prefix kilo shall not be used to mean 210 (that is, 1024).

*kilobit per second

kb/s

*kilobyte

kB

kB Δ 1000 bytes.

kilogauss

kG

Deprecated (see ANSI/IEEE Std 268-1992).

*kilogram

kg

SI unit of mass.

kilogram-force

kgf

Deprecated (see ANSI/IEEE Std 268-1992). In some countries the name kilopond (kp) has been used for this unit.

*kilohertz

kHz

*kilohm

kΩ

R

*kilometer

km

*kilometer per hour

km/h

kilopound-force

klbf

Kilopound-force should not be misinterpreted as kilopond (see kilogram-force).

*kilovar

kvar

Q

*kilovolt

kV

*kilovoltampere

kVA

KVA, kva

*kilowatt

kW

kilowatthour

kWh

Also kW·h.

knot

kn

kn Δ nmi/h. 0.514 m/s.

lambert

L

L Δ (1/π)cd/cm2. A CGS unit of luminance. One lumen per square centimeter leaves a surface whose luminance is one lambert in all directions within a hemisphere. Deprecated (see ANSI/IEEE Std 268-1992).

*liter

L

L Δ 10-3 m3. In 1979, the CGPM approved L and l as alternative symbols for the liter. Because of frequent confusion with the numeral 1, the letter symbol l is not recommended for U.S. use (see Federal Register notice of December 20, 1990, vol. 55, no. 245, p. 52242). The script l shall not be used as a symbol for liter.

V, v

liter per second

L/s

*lumen

lm

SI unit of luminous flux.

Φ

lumen per square foot

lm/ft2

A unit of illuminance and also a unit of luminous exitance. Use of the SI unit, lumen per square meter, is preferred.

*lumen per square meter

lm/m2

SI unit of luminous exitance.

M

*lumen per watt

lm/W

SI unit of luminous efficacy.

K(λ)K, Kt

*lumen second

lm·s

SI unit of quantity of light.

Q

*lux

lx

1x/lm Δ /m2. SI unit of illuminance.

E

maxwell

Mx

The maxwell is the electromagnetic CGS unit of magnetic flux. Deprecated (see ANSI/IEEE Std 268-1992).

mebi

Mi

Prefix for 220.

*mega

M

SI prefix for 106. The prefix mega shall not be used to mean 220 (that is, 1 048 576).

megabit per second

Mb/s

*megabyte

MB

MB Δ 1 000 000 bytes.

*megaelectronvolt

MeV

*megahertz

MHz

*megohm

MΩ

M

*meter

m

SI unit of length.

L

metric ton

t

t Δ 1000 kg. Use of the name tonne is deprecated in the U.S. (see ANSI/IEEE Std 268-1992).

mho

S

Ω-1. The name mho was formerly given to the reciprocal ohm. Deprecated; see siemens (S).

*micro

µ

SI prefix for 10-6.

*microampere

µA

*microfarad

µF

*microgram

µg

*microhenry

µH

microinch

µin

*microliter

µL

See note for liter.

*micrometer

µm

µ

micron

µm

µ

The name micron is deprecated.

Use micrometer.

*microsecond

µs

*microwatt

µW

mil

mil

mil Δ 0.001 in.

mile (statute)

mi

mi Δ 5280 ft = 1609 m.

mile per hour

mi/h

mph

Although use of mph as an abbreviation is common, it should not be used as a symbol.

*milli

m

SI prefix for 10-3.

*milliampere

mA

millibar

mbar

Use of the bar is strongly discouraged in ANSI/IEEE Std 268-1992, except for limited use in meteorology.

*milligram

mg

*millihenry

mH

*milliliter

mL

See liter.

*millimeter

mm

millimeter of mercury

mmHg

mmHg = 133.322 Pa. Deprecated (see ANSI/IEEE Std 268-1992).

millimicron

nm

Use of the name millimicron for the nanometer is deprecated.

*millipascal second

mPa · s

SI unit-multiple of dynamic viscosity.

*millisecond

ms

*millivolt

mV

*milliwatt

mW

*minute (plane angle)

′

*minute (time)

min

Time may also be designated by means of superscripts as in the following example: 9h46m30s.

*mole

mol

SI unit of amount of substance. The mole is the amount of substance of a system that contains as many elementary entities as there are atoms in 0.012 kg of carbon 12. When the mole is used, the elementary entities shall be specified and may be atoms, molecules, ions, electrons, other particles, or specified groups of such particles.

month       

mo

*nano

n

SI prefix for 10-9.

*nanoampere

nA

*nanofarad

nF

*nanometer

nm

*nanosecond

ns

nautical mile

nmi

nmi Δ 1852 m.

*neper

Np

*newton

N

SI unit of force.

*newton meter

N · m

*newton per square meter

N/m2

SI unit of pressure or stress. See pascal.

oersted

Oe

oe

The oersted is the electromagnetic CGS unit of magnetic field strength. Deprecated (see ANSI/IEEE Std 268-1992).

*ohm

Ω

SI unit of resistance.

ounce (avoirdupois)

oz

oz Δ 1/16 lb = 28.350 g.

*pascal

Pa

Pa Δ N/m2. SI unit of pressure or stress.

*pascal second

Pa · s

SI unit of dynamic viscosity.

pebi

Pi

Prefix for 250.

*peta

P

SI prefix for 1015.

phot

ph

ph Δ lm/cm2. CGS unit of illuminance. Deprecated (see ANSI/IEEE Std 268-1992).

*pico

p

SI prefix for 10-12.

*picofarad

pF

*picowatt

pW

pint

pt

pt (U.K.) = 0.568 26 L.

pt (U.S. dry) = 0.550 6 L.

pt (U.S. liquid) = 0.473 18 L.

poise

P

Deprecated (see ANSI/IEEE Std 268-1992).

pound (avoirdupois)

lb

lb Δ 0.453 592 37 kg.

pound per cubic foot

lb/ft3

pound-force

lbf

lbf = 4.4482 N.

pound-force foot

lbf · ft

pound-force per square foot

lbf/ft2

pound-force per square inch

lbf/in2

psi

Although use of the abbreviation psi is common, it should not be used as a symbol.

poundal

pdl

pdl Δ lb · ft/s2 = 0.1383 N

quart

qt

qt (U.K.) = 1.1365 L.

qt (U.S. dry) = 1.1012 L.

qt (U.S. liquid) = 0.946 35 L.

rad

rd

rd Δ 0.01 Gy. A unit of absorbed dose in the field of radiation dosimetry. Use of the SI unit, the gray, is preferred.

*radian

rad

SI unit of plane angle.

rem

rem

rem Δ 0.01 Sv. A unit of dose equivalent in the field of radiation dosimetry. Use of the SI unit, the sievert, is preferred. 1  rem = 0.01 Sv.

revolution per minute

r/min

Although use of rpm as an abbreviation is common, it should not be used as a symbol.

revolution per second

r/s

roentgen

R

A unit of exposure in the field of radiation dosimetry.

*second (plane angle)

''

1'' = 4.848 · 10-6 rad.

*second (time)

s

SI unit of time.

*siemens

S

S Δ Ω-1. SI unit of conductance.

*sievert

Sv

SI unit of dose equivalent in the field of radiation dosimetry.

slug

slug

slug Δ lbf · s2/ft = 14.594 kg.

square foot

ft2

square inch

in2

*square meter

m2

*square meter per second

m2/s

SI unit of kinematic viscosity.

*square millimeter per second

mm2/s

SI unit-multiple of kinematic viscosity.

square yard

yd2

*steradian

sr

SI unit of solid angle.

stilb

sb

sb Δ cd/cm2. A CGS unit of luminance. Deprecated (see ANSI/IEEE Std 268-1992).

stokes

St

Deprecated (see ANSI/IEEE Std 268-1992).

tebi

Ti

Prefix for 240.

*tera

T

SI prefix for 1012.

terabyte

TB

TB Δ 1012 B.

*tesla

T

T Δ N/(A · m)2 Δ Wb/m2. SI unit of magnetic flux density (magnetic induction).

therm

thm

thm Δ 100 000 Btu.

ton (short)

ton

ton Δ 2000 lb.

ton, metric

T

t Δ 1000 kg. Use of the tonne for this unit is deprecated in the U.S. (see ANSI/IEEE Std 268-1992).

torr

torr

A unit of pressure equal to 0.001316 atmosphere; named after Torricelli.

*(unified) atomic mass unit

u

The (unified) atomic mass unit is defined as one-twelfth of the mass of an atom of the carbon- 12 nuclide. Use of the old atomic mass unit (amu), defined by reference to oxygen, is deprecated.

*var

var

IEC name and symbol for SI unit of reactive power.

*volt

V

SI unit of voltage.

*volt per meter

V/m

SI unit of electric field strength.

*voltampere

VA

va

IEC name and symbol for SI unit of apparent power.

*watt

W

SI unit of power.

*watt per meter kelvin

W/(m · K)

SI unit of thermal conductivity.

*watt per steradian

W/sr

SI unit of radiant intensity.

*watt per steradian square meter

(W/sr · m2)

SI unit of radiance.

watthour

Wh

*weber

Wb

Wb Δ V·s. SI unit of magnetic flux.

yard

yd

yd Δ 0.9144 m.

year

a

Also W·h.

yobi

Yi

Prefix for 280.

yocto

y

SI prefix for 10-24.

yotta

Y

SI prefix for 1024.

zebi

Zi

Prefix for 270.

zepto

z

SI prefix for 10-21.

zetta

Z

SI prefix for 1021.

D. Miscellaneous Alphabetical Abbreviations, Acronyms, and Symbols

NOTE: Key: fn—function name (roman); s—symbol (italic); u—unit abbreviation (roman); *—acronyms that must be defined in text.

A

A

(s) Hermitian conjugate of A

Å 

(u) angstrom

ab 

(prefix) denotes absolute system of (CGS) units. Abampere, abcoulomb, abvolt, abohm, abfarad, abmho, abhenry (use not recommended, see units list)

abs

absolute

ABS

air-bearing surface

Ac

alternating current

ACB

air circuit breaker*

ACSR 

steel-reinforced aluminum cable*

AD

attention display*

A–D, A/D 

analog-to-digital

ADF 

automatic direction finder*

a.e.

almost everywhere (in equations)

AEW

airborne early warning*

AF

audio frequency*

AFB 

Air Force Base

AFC 

automatic frequency control*

AFM 

atomic force microscopy

AGC 

automatic gain control*

AGFM

alternating gradient force magnetometer

AGM 

arithmetical–geometric mean*

A∙h (u)

ampere hour

Ai (fn)

Airy integral

AM

amplitude modulation

a.m. 

ante meridiem (morning)

ama

automatic message accounting*

and 

(small caps) logical and operation

ANI 

automatic number identification

ANN

artificial neural network*

antilog (fn) 

antilogarithm

AOGM 

accelerated optimum gradient method*

AOPT 

air-operated press type*

APD 

avalanche photodiode

API

air position indicator*

AQL 

acceptable quality level

AR 

antireflection*; autoregressive*

arcsin

arccos

arctan

arccot

arcsec

arccsc

(fn) inverse trigonometric functions

arg

(fn) argument

ARMA 

autoregressive moving average*

a.s. 

almost surely (in equations)

ASE 

amplified spontaneous emission*

ASIC 

application specified integrated circuit*

ASK 

amplitude-shift keying

ASW 

antisubmarine warfare* (note: for acoustic surface wave use SAW)

at (u) 

technical atmosphere: 1 kgf/cm

At (u)

ampere turn (note: no longer in use; change to A)

ATM 

asynchronous transfer mode*

atm (u) 

atmosphere

ATR 

antitransmit receive*

ATT 

avalanche transit time*

av 

average (subscript)

AVC

automatic volume control*

avg (fn) 

average (use av as subscript)

AWE 

asymptotic wave evaluation*

AWG 

American wire gauge

AWGN 

additive white Gaussian noise*

B

bar (u) 

bar

barye (u) 

barye: microbar (use not recommended; see units list)

bbl (u) 

barrel (see units list)

bcc 

body-centered cubic (of crystals)

BCD 

binary coded decimal

BCH 

Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghen (codes)

BCT 

bushing current transformer*

Bd (u) 

baud* (see units list)

B–E 

base–emitter source

Be 

Baume

bei, ber (fn) 

Kelvin forms of Bessel function

BEM  

boundary-element method

BER 

bit error rate*

BeV, bev (u) 

use GeV

BFO

beat-frequency oscillator*

B–H B–H curve: 

curve of magnetic induction (magnetic flux–density) versus magnetic intensity (field intensity) B–H relationship. B–H loop: hysteresis loop

Bhp

brake horsepower*

Bi (fn) 

Airy integral: (u) bit: = 10 A*

BIL 

basic impulse insulation level*

BJT 

bipolar junction transistor*

BMEP 

brake mean effective pressure*

bpi (u) 

bit per inch: use b/in

bps (u)

bit per second: use b/s

BPSK 

binary phase-shift keying

BRA

biased rectifier amplifier*

BS 

breaking strength*

BS 

British Standards*

B&S 

Brown and Sharpe gauge*

BSF 

bulk shielding facility*

BSL 

basic switching surge insulation level*

BTU

(u) British thermal unit

BWG 

Birmingham wire gauge*

BWK 

Brillouin–Wentzel–Kramers (method)*

BWO 

backward-wave oscillator*

BWR 

boiling water reactor*

C

C (u) 

coulomb

°C (o) 

degree Celsius

c (u) 

cycle: use Hz; centi- (prefix to unit abbreviation)

c (s) 

speed of light in a vacuum

cal (u) 

calorie (use not recommended; see units list)

CATV 

community antenna television system

cc (u) 

cubic centimeter: use cm3

c.c. 

complex conjugate (in equations)

CCB 

coin collecting box (British telephones)*

CCD 

charge-coupled device*

CCR 

closed-cycle refrigerator*

cd (u) 

candela

cdf

cumulative distribution function*

CDMA 

code division multiple access*

CDO 

community dial offices*

CD-ROM 

compact disk read-only memory

cdrx 

external critical damping resistance: use caps*

CEMF 

counterelectromotive force*

cf. 

compare

cfm (u) 

cubic feet per minute: use ft3/min

cfs (u)

cubic feet per second: use ft3/s

CGS

centimeter-gram-second (system of units)

Ci (fn) 

cosine integral; (u) curie

CIM

computer integrated manufacturing*

CIR 

carrier-to-interference ratio*

ckVA 

capacitive kilovoltamperes (write out)

cmil (u) 

circular mil

CMOS 

complementary metal–oxide–semiconductor

CNN 

cellular neural network

COP 

coefficient of performance*

cos

cosec

cosh

cot

coth

covers

(fn) cosine

(fn) cosecant: use csc

(fn) hyperbolic cosine

(fn) cotangent

(fn) hyperbolic cotangent

(fn) coversine

cP (o)

centipoise (see units list)

CPFSK 

continuous phase frequency-shift keying*

CPM 

continuous phase modulation*

CPSK

continuous phase-shift keying; coherent phase-shift keying*

CPU

central processing unit

CRO 

cathode-ray oscilloscope

CRS 

cold-rolled steel*

CRT 

cathode-ray tube

c/s (u) 

cycle per second: use Hz

csc (fn) 

cosecant

csch (fn)

hyperbolic cosecant cs (u) centistokes: use cSt or write out (see units list)

CSP 

completely self-protected

cSt (u) 

centistokes (see units list)

CSV 

corona-starting voltage

CT 

current transformer*

CTC 

centralized traffic control

ctn (fn) 

cotangent: use cot

curl (fn) 

curl 

CV 

capacitance–voltage

CVD 

chemical vapor deposited

CW 

continuous wave*

D

DA 

design automation

dB (u) 

decibel

dc 

direct current (DC at start of sentence or in article title)

DC 

directional coupler

DDA 

digital differential analyzer*

DDD 

direct distance dialing*

DE 

disruptive effect*

det (fn) 

determinant

DF 

direction finder*; deuterium fluoride; degree of freedom*

DFB 

distributed feedback

DFT 

discrete Fourier transform*

diag 

(diagonal)

diam 

diameter

DIC 

Diploma of membership in Imperial College of Science and Technology

div (fn) 

divergence; division (u) in charts

DMA 

direct memory access*

DME 

distance-measuring equipment*

DOD 

diameter over dielectric; Department of Defense

DOF 

degree of freedom (unit)

DP 

dial pulse*

DPCM 

differential pulse code modulation*

DPDT 

double-pole double-throw switch*

DPH 

diamond pool hardness*

DPQSK 

differential quadrature phase-shift keying*

DPSK 

differential phase-shift keying*

DRCPR 

differential reactive current protective relay*

DRO 

destructive readout*; doubly resonant oscillator

DS

dielectric strength*; direct sequence*

DSB

double sideband*

DSP 

digital signal processor

DVP

differential vapor pressure*

DWT 

discrete wavelet transform*

dyn (u) 

dyne

E

EB 

emergency bank*

EC 

eddy current; electrical conductivity* (grade of Al)

ECG 

electrocardiogram

ECL 

emitter-coupled logic*

ECM

electronic countermeasures

ECT 

eddy current testing

ED 

enforced draft

EDFA 

erbium-doped fiber amplifiers*

EDP 

electronic data processing

EDS 

energy dispersive spectrometer

EDX 

energy dispersive X-ray

EEG 

electroencephalogram

EHD 

electrohydrodynamic*

EHF 

extremely high frequency*

EHIPS 

extra heavy iron pipe size*

EHV 

extra high voltage

Ei (fn) 

exponential integral

ELF 

extremely low frequency*

EM 

electromagnetic*

EMC 

electromagnetic compatibility*

EMF 

electromotive force*

EMI 

electromagnetic interference*

ems 

expected value of mean square*

EMU 

electromagnetic units

EOF 

end of file

erf (fn) 

error function

erfc (fn) 

complementary error function

erg (u) 

erg

ERP 

effective radiated power*

ESS

electrical sheet steel*

ESU 

electrostatic units

eV (u) 

electronvolt

exor 

exclusive-or circuit (small caps)

exp (fn) 

exponential function

exsec (fn) 

exsecant

F

f (f-stop, f/22) 

ratio of focal length to aperture

F (u) 

farad

°F (u) 

degree Fahrenheit

FA 

forced-air-cooled transformer*

fcc 

face-centered cubic (of crystals)

FCC 

Federal Communications Commission

FD

flux density*

FDA

finite difference approximations*

FDM 

frequency-division multiplexing*

FDMA 

frequency-division multiple access*

FDTD 

finite-difference time domain*

FEA  

finite-element analysis

FET 

field-effect transistor

ff. 

following pages

FFT 

fast Fourier transform*

FIFO 

first-in first-out

FIM 

field intensity meter*

FIR 

finite-impulse response*

fL (u) 

footlambert

FL 

full load

FM 

frequency modulation

FMFB 

FM feedback receiver*

FMR 

frequency of maximum reliability*; ferromagnetic resonance

FPGA 

field-programmable gate array*

fpm, fps (u)

feet per minute: use ft/min; feet per second: use ft/s

FS 

full scale

FSK 

frequency-shift keying*

FSM

finite-state machine*

ft (u) 

foot

FTL 

flat tie-line*

FTP 

file transfer protocol

FW 

full wave

FWHM 

full-width at half-maximum*

FWM 

four-wave mixing*

G

G 

giga- (prefix to unit abbreviations) = 109

G (u) 

gauss

g 

acceleration of gravity, “gee force”; use as unit with metric prefix, as in 3 mg

G (s) 

gravitational constant

Gal (u) 

gal (gravitational unit)

gal (u) 

gallon

Gb (u) 

gilbert

GCA 

ground-controlled approach*

gcd 

greatest common denominator (may be function name)

GenAI

generative artificial intelligence

GLB 

greatest lower bound*

GMD 

geometric mean distance*

GMEC 

generalized minimum effort control*

GMF 

geometric mean frequency

GMR 

geometric mean radius

GMT 

Greenwich mean time

gpd (u) 

gallon per day: use gal/day

GPS 

Global Positioning System

GPU 

graphical processing unit, General Public Utilities*

grad (fn) 

gradient

GSE 

ground support equipment*

GTD 

geometrical theory of diffraction

GUI

graphical user interface

GW 

ground wire

H

h (s) 

Planck’s constant

H (u)

henry

H (s) 

magnetic intensity; magnetic field strength

hav, havers (fn) 

haversine

HBT 

heterojunction bipolar transistor

hcp 

hexagonal close-packed (of crystals)

HD 

hard-drawn*

HDBC 

hard-drawn bare copper*

HDC 

hard-drawn copper*

HDD  

hard disk drive

HDT 

hard-drawn tubing*

HEMT 

high-electron mobility transistor

HF

high frequency; hydrogen fluoride

HFET 

heterojunction FET

HG 

mercury

hipot 

high potential (write out)

hp (u) 

horsepower

HTC 

high-tension cable*

HTML 

hypertext markup language

HV 

high voltage

HVdc 

high voltage direct current

Hz (u)

hertz

I

I (s) current (fn) 

imaginary part of: use Im

IACS 

International Annealed Copper Standard*

IC

impedance compensation*; integrated circuit

ICW 

interrupted continuous wave*

ID 

inside diameter; induced draft*; interdigital*

IDP 

integrated data processing*

IF 

intermediate frequency

iff 

if and only if

IFT 

interfacial tension*

IGFET

insulated-gate field-effect transistor

i.i.d. 

independent identically distributed*

IIR 

infinite-impulse response

ILS 

instrument landing system*

Im (fn) 

imaginary part of

IM 

intermediate modulation

IMPATT 

impact ionization avalanche transit time (diode)

INE 

irredundant normal equivalent*

inf (fn) 

infimum

int (fn) 

integer value of

I/O, I–O 

input–output

IoT 

Internet of Things*

IP 

Internet Protocol

ips (u) 

inch per second: use in/s

IPS 

iron pipe size; international pipe standard*

IR 

infrared

IR 

current–resistance

ISB 

independent sideband*

ISE

integral of squared error*

ISI 

intersymbol interference

itae 

integral of time-multiplied absolute value of error

ITI  

inter-track interference

I–V (s) 

current–voltage (characteristic or curve)

IVA

induced voltamperes

IX 

current–reactance (drop)

IZ 

current–impedance

J

J (u) 

joule

JFET 

junction field-effect transistor

JPEG

Joint Photographers Expert Group

K

k 

kilo (prefix to unit abbreviations) = 103

K (u) 

Kelvin

Kayser (u) 

= cm-1 (wavenumber)

kbps (u) 

kilobits per second: use kb/s

KCL 

Kirchhoff’s current law

kcm, KCM (u) 

thousand circular mils: use kcmil

kg (u) 

kilogram

KGO, KGOe, KGoe, KgOe (u) 

use kO·Oe

kgp (u) 

kilogrampois (French): use kg

kG.Oe (u) 

kilogauss oersted

kip 

thousand pounds

kn (u)

knot (nautical mile per hour)

KOH

potassium hydroxide

kp (u) 

kilopound (German): use kg

kt (s) 

Boltzmann’s constant × time

KVL 

Kirchhoff’s voltage law

kVp (u) 

kilovolt peak*

L

l (u)

liter

L (u) 

lambert

LAN 

local area network

lb (u) 

pound

lbf (u) 

pound-force

LC 

inductance–capacitance

lcm 

least common multiple (may be function name)

LCR 

inductance–capacitance–resistance

LCS 

load current substation*

LDC 

line drop compensator*; load division circulation

LED

light-emitting diode

LF 

low-frequency

LHP 

left-half plane*

LHS

left-hand side*

Li (fn) 

logarithmic integral

lim (fn) 

limit

l.i.m. (fn) 

limit in the mean

L–L

line to line*

lm (u)

lumen

LMLT

locus of major loop tips*

LMS 

least mean square

LMT 

local mean time*

ln (fn) 

natural logarithm (base e)

L–N 

line to neutral*

LNA 

low noise amplifier

LO 

local oscillator*

log, logn (fn) 

logarithm, logarithm base n (where n = 2, 10, etc.)

LP 

linear programming*

LPE 

liquid phase epitaxy*

LR 

inductance–resistance

LRC 

load ratio control*

LSB 

least significant bit

LSI 

large-scale integration*; large-scale integrated*

LST 

local standard time

LTC 

load tap-changing*

LTE 

long-term evolution

LTS 

laser-triggered switching*

LUF

lowest usable frequency*

lx (u) 

lux

M

m (u) 

meter; milli- (prefix to unit abbreviations) = 10-3

M 

mega- (prefix to unit abbreviations) = 106; mole

MAG 

maximum available gain

MAP 

maximum a posteriori

max (fn) 

maximum; also used as subscript

MC  

Monte Carlo

mcm, MCM (u) 

thousand circular mils: use kcmil

mc/mM (u) 

millicuries per millimole: use mCi/mM

MCS 

multicircuit substation*

MCT 

movable core transformer*

MCW 

modulated continuous wave*

MDF 

manual direction finder*

MDS 

minimum detectable signal

MEMS  

micro-electromechanical systems

MESFET 

metal–semiconductor field-effect transistor

MEW 

microwave early warning*

MF 

medium frequency*

MFM  

magnetic force microscopy

MFSK 

minimum frequency-shift keying

MGO (u) 

megagauss oersted: use MG·Oe

MG·Oe (u) 

megagauss oersted

MHD 

magnetohydrodynamics

mho (u) 

mho (also Ω^{-1})

mi (u) 

mile

MIM 

metal–insulator–metal

MIMO 

multi-in multi-out*

mio (fn) 

minimum; also used as subscript

MIS 

metal–insulator–semiconductor*

MKS 

meter–kilogram–second (system of units)

ml 

milliliter

MLE 

maximum-likelihood estimation*

MLSD 

maximum-likelihood sequence detector

MLSE 

maximum-likelihood sequence estimator*

MMF 

magnetomotive force

mmHg (u) 

millimeter of mercury

MMIC 

monolithic microwave integrated circuit*

mm2O (u) 

millimeter of water

mmse 

minimum mean square error

MOCVD 

metal–organic chemical vapor deposition*

mod 

modulo

MOKE  

magnetooptic Kerr effect

MoM 

method of moments*

MOS 

metal–oxide–semiconductor

MOSFET 

MOS field-effect transistor

MOST 

MOS transistor

MOVPE 

metal–organic vapor phase epitaxy*

MPEG 

Moving Pictures Expert Group

MPIE 

mixed potential integral equation

MRAM  

magnetic random access memory

MRI 

magnetic resonance imaging

MSB 

most significant bit

mse 

mean square error

MSIC 

medium scale integrated circuits*

MTBE 

mean time between explosions

MTBF 

mean time between failures*

MTI 

multiple target indicator*; moving target indicator

MTJ  

magnetic tunnel junction

MTL  

multiconductor transmission line

MU 

multiple unit*

MUF

maximum usable frequency*

MVQE 

minimum variance quantum estimator

Mx (u) 

maxwell

MZI 

Mach–Zehnder interferometric*

N

n 

nano (prefix to unit abbreviations) = 10-9

N (u)

newton

NA 

numerical aperture*

nand 

not-and circuit (small caps)

nat (u) 

nat

NC 

diode negative-conductance diode*

NDRO 

nondestructive readout

NDT 

nondestructive testing*

NIC 

negative impedance converter*

NIR 

near infrared response*

nit (u) 

nit

Nkw-hr (u) 

net kilowatthour: use net kW·h

NL

no load

nmi (u)

nautical mile

NMR 

nuclear magnetic resonance*

nor 

not-or circuit (small caps)

NP

nameplate (rating)

Np (u) 

neper

n-p-n 

semiconductor forms: Roman, lowercase, hyphens

NRZ 

nonreturn to zero*

NTC 

negative temperature coefficient*

NWP 

network protector

O

OCB 

oil circuit breaker*

OCR 

oil circuit recloser*

OD 

outside diameter

Oe (u) 

oersted

OEIC 

optoelectronic integrated circuit*

OFDA

optical-fiber frequency-domain analysis*

OGM 

optimum gradient method

OOK 

on–off keying

OOP 

object-oriented programming*

opt (fn) 

optimum: also used as subscript

or 

or circuit (small caps)

OSM 

omni spectra miniature

OTDM 

optical time-division multiplexing*

O-wave 

ordinary-wave (ionogram)

oz (u) 

ounce

P

p 

pico- (prefix to unit abbreviations) = 10-12

P (u)

poise

Pa (u) 

pascal

PAE 

power-added efficiency

PAM 

pulse-amplitude modulation*

PAX 

private automatic exchange*

PBX 

private branch exchange*

pc (u) 

parsec

PC 

personal computer

PCM 

pulse-code modulation*; pulse-count modulation*

PD 

potential difference*

pdf 

probability density function*

pdl (u) 

poundal (see units list)

PDM 

pulse-duration modulation*

Pe (s) 

probability of error

PER 

probability of error

PES 

position error signal

PF 

power factor*

ph (fn) 

phase

pH 

power of hydrogen (acidity or alkalinity of solution)

PI 

polarization index

PID 

proportional–integral–differential*

PILC 

paper-insulated lead-covered*

PIN 

use p-i-n for diodes, etc.

p-i-n 

semiconductor forms: Roman, lowercase, hyphens

PL/1 

a programming language

PLC 

power line carrier*

PLL 

phase-locked loop*

PM 

phase modulation*

p.m.

post meridiem (small caps)

PML 

perfectly matched layer

PMMA 

polymethyl methacrylate*

PMR  

perpendicular magnetic recording

p-n-i-p 

semiconductor forms: Roman, lowercase, hyphens

p-n-p 

semiconductor forms: Roman, lowercase, hyphens

POD 

para-operational device*

POWp (u) 

picowatts psophometrically weighted at a point of zero relative level*

pp, p-p

peak to peak*

PPI 

plan-position indicator*

ppm (u) 

parts per million; pulse per minute*

PPM 

pulse-position modulation*

pps (u) 

pulse per second*

Pr (fn)

probability (appears as Pr x | x = U)

PRA 

pulse relaxation amplifier

PRF 

pulse-repetition frequency*

PRML  

partial response maximum likelihood

Prob., 

Pr x|· use Pr (usually)

PRR 

pulse-repetition rate*

PSD  

power spectral density

PSF 

power separation filter*

psi (u) 

pounds per square inch: change to lb/in2 unless paper also contains psia and/or psig

psia (u) 

pound-force per square inch absolute (stet)

psig (u) 

pound-force per square inch gauge (stet)

PSK 

phase-shift keying*

PTM 

pulse–time modulation

p.u. 

per unit

PVC 

polyvinyl chloride*

PWL  

piecewise linear

PWM 

pulse width modulation*

PWR 

pressurized water reactor*

PZT 

lead zirconate titanate

Q

Q 

quality factor; figure of merit

QAM 

quadrature-amplitude modulation*

Q.E.D. 

quod erat demonstrandum (end of proof) (set flush right)

QoS 

quality of service

QP 

quasi-peak*

QPSK 

quaternary phase-shift keying

QW 

quantum well*

R

R (u) 

roentgen

R (fn) 

real part of: use Re

°R (u) 

degrees Rankine

rad (u) 

radian

RAM 

random access memory

RB 

circuit transient blocking relay circuit*

RC 

resistance–capacitance

RCF 

radar cross section*

R&D 

research and development

Re (fn) 

real part of: use Re (be sure of this meaning before changing)

redox 

reduction–oxidation

rem (u)

Roentgen equivalent, man

RF 

radio frequency

RFI 

radio frequency interference*

RFU 

reclosing fuses*

RH 

relative humidity*

RHS

right-hand side*

RI 

radio interference*

RIFI 

radio interference and field intensity*

RIL 

radio interference level*

RIN

relative intensity noise*

RL 

resistance–inductance

RMI 

radiomagnetic indicator*

rms 

root-mean-square (error); root mean square

ROM 

read-only memory

rpm (u) 

revolution per minute: use r/min

rps (u) 

revolution per second: use r/s

RSG 

recurrent surge generator*

RTD 

resistance temperature detectors

RV 

random variable

RX 

resistance–reactance

S

s (u) 

second

S (u) 

siemens

SAR 

specific absorption rate

SATT 

Strowger Automatic Toll Ticket*

SAW 

surface acoustic wave*

SC 

switched-capacitor*(adj)

SCA 

steel-reinforced aluminum cable*

SCC 

signal component control*

scfm 

standard cubic feet per minute*

SCL 

space-charge limited*

scr 

short-circuit ratio*

SCR 

silicon-controlled rectifier

sec (fn) 

secant; (u) second: use s; second of arc*

sech (fn) 

hyperbolic secant

SEM 

scanning electron microscope

SF 

single frequency*

SGML 

standard generalized markup language

sgn (fn) 

signum function

SHF s

upper high frequency*

SI 

severity index*; Systeme International d’Unites (International System of Units)

Si, si (fn) 

sine integral

sin (fn) 

sine

sinc (fn) 

sinc x = (sin x) / x

sinh (fn) 

hyperbolic sine

SINR 

signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio*

SIR 

signal-to-interference ratio

SISO 

single-in, single-out*

SLAR 

side looking airborne radar

SLG

single line to ground

SMSA 

standard metropolitan statistical area

S/N  

signal-to-noise ratio

SNR 

signal-to-noise ratio

SoC 

system-on-chip*

SPDT 

single-pole double-throw (switch)*

SPICE 

Simulation Program with Integrated Circuit Emphasis

SPT  

single-pole type

sq square: 

if on a unit, change to 2

SQUID  

superconducting quantum interference device

sr (u) 

steradian

SR 

saturable reactor*

SS 

subsystems*

SSB 

single sideband*

s.t. 

subject to

St (u)

stokes

sterad (u) 

steradian: use sr

SUL  

soft underlayer

SUMT 

sequential unconstrained minimization techniques

sup (fn)

supremum

sus 

Saybolt universal seconds (oil viscosity)*

sw 

sine wave*

SW 

short wave*

SWG 

standard wire gauge*

SWR 

standing-wave ratio*

T

t (u) 

tonne

T (u) 

tesla

tan (fn)

tangent

tanh (fn) hyperbolic tangent

TCUL 

tap-changing under load*

TDM 

time-division modulation*; time-division multiplexing*

TDMA

time-division multiple access*

TE 

transverse electric (appears as TE001 and TE01)

TEFC 

totally enclosed fan-cooled*

Telex

teleprinter exchange*

TEM 

transverse electromagnetic

TFT 

thin-film transistor*

tg (fn) 

tangent: use tan

th (u) 

thermie

TIF 

telephone influence factor*

TLM 

transmission-line matrix

TM 

transverse magnetic

tof 

thermal ohms per foot (spell out)

torr (u)

torr

tpc (u) 

turns per centimeter: turns/cm

TPC 

turns per coil*

tr (fn)

trace

Tr

transpose

TSS 

time sharing system

TTL 

transistor–transistor logic

TTY 

teleprinter

tu 

traffic units*

TVI 

television interference*

TWA 

traveling-wave amplifier*

TWM 

traveling-wave maser*

TWP 

traveling-wave phototube*

TWT 

traveling-wave tube

U

UHF 

ultrahigh frequency

ult (fn) 

ultimate

UPS 

uninterruptible power system*

uniform RC sections (stet overbar)

URL 

uniform resource locator

XRD  

X-ray diffraction

UT 

universal time

UTS 

ultimate tensile strength

UV 

ultraviolet

V

V (u) 

volt

V (s) 

voltage

VA (u) 

voltampere; Viterbi algorithm*

var (u) 

var

VCL 

varnished-cambric lead-covered*

VCO 

voltage-controlled oscillator*

VCW 

type V copper weld*

VDS 

voltage divider switching*

ver, vers (fn) 

versine

VF 

voice frequency*

VFO 

variable-frequency oscillator*

VHF 

very high frequency*

V–I 

voltage–current (characteristic of curve)

VLF 

very low frequency*

VLSI 

very large scale integration*

VOR 

very high-frequency omnidirectional radio

VR 

voltage regulator*

VSB 

vestigial sideband*

VSWR 

voltage standing-wave ratio

VTB 

voltage time to breakdown*

VTVM 

vacuum-tube voltmeter

vu 

volume units*

W

W (u) 

watt

WAN 

wide area network

Wb (u) 

weber

WDM

wavelength-division multiplexing*

WDMA 

wavelength-division multiple access*

WKB 

Wentzel–Kramer–Brillouin*

wpl, w.p.l. 

with probability 1*

wrt, w.r.t. 

with respect to

WT 

watertight*

wt% 

weight percent

X

XPM c

ross-phase modulation

xor 

exclusive-or circuit (small caps)

X-wave 

extraordinary-wave (ionogram)

Y

YAG 

yttrium aluminum garnet

yd (u) 

yard

YIG 

yttrium iron garnet

Factor by Which the Unit Is Modified

Prefix

Symbol

1000000000000 = 1012

tera

T

1000000000 = 109

giga

G

1000000 = 106

mega

M

1000 = 103

kilo

k

100 = 102

hecto

h

10 = 101

deka

da

0.1 = 10-1

deci

d

0.01 = 10-2

centi

c

0.001 = 10-3

milli

m

0.000001 =10-6

micro

μ

0.000000001 = 10-9

nano

n

0.000000000001 = 10-12

pico

p

0.000000000000001 = 10-15

femto

f

0.000000000000000001 = 10-18

atto

a

For prefixes indicating powers of 2, see Table 7 at the NIST site.

E. Inclusive Language Guide

Requirements:

Use “people-first language,” i.e., the person has X; has been diagnosed with X; uses a/n X; etc.

Do not spell out the acronyms LGBTQIA+, LGBT, LGBTQ, LGBTQIA.

Highlighted terms must be avoided at all times.

Insensitive Term/Phrase

Replace With

Definition/Background

Additional Notes

A.D. (when referencing history/time)

C.E., common era

Abbreviation of the Latin phrase anno Domini, translated as “the year of the Lord.” Traditionally, it is used to date years after the birth of Jesus

This contradicts AP style.

Able-bodied

non-disabled/does not have a disability

Afro-American/Negro/

Colored/Nigger (in reference to race)

Avoid in all instances; African American*; Black†

People of African descent have widely varied cultural backgrounds, family histories, and family experiences. Some will be from Caribbean islands, Latin America, various regions in the United States, countries in Africa, or elsewhere. Some American people of African ancestry prefer “Black,” and others prefer “African American”; both terms are acceptable.

* Specific to people of specific African descent; not to be used as an umbrella for people of African ancestry worldwide.

† Widely accepted to encompass multiple ethnicities and/or national origins.

B.C. (when referencing history/time)

B.C.E., before common era

Literally, before Christ or the Christian era.

This contradicts AP style.

Black box

Closed box

Preferred term from IEEE Thesaurus

Blacklist; black list

Blocklist; block list

The Hollywood blacklist was instituted by the House Un-American Activities Committee in 1947 to block screenwriters and other Hollywood professionals who were purported to have Communist sympathies from obtaining employment. A list or compilation that identifies entities that are denied, unrecognized, or ostracized. The term's racist connotations derive from the idea that black equates to negative; this view can be controversial.

Preferred term from IEEE Thesaurus

Blind

blind*; limited vision; low vision; partially sighted†

According to the American Foundation for the Blind, the term “legally blind” denotes a person with 20/200 visual acuity or less. Therefore, “blind” or “legally blind” is acceptable for people with almost complete vision loss. Many people with vision loss are not considered blind.

* Use only with people who are “legally blind” (a person with 20/200 visual acuity or less)

† Used most often in British publications

Blind channel estimation

Source channel estimation

Preferred term from IEEE Thesaurus

Blind equalizers

Source equalizers

Preferred term from IEEE Thesaurus

Blind signal separation

Mix signal separation

Preferred term from IEEE Thesaurus

Blind source separation

Mix source separation

Preferred term from IEEE Thesaurus

Caretaker

caregiver

A caregiver is an individual who assists another, including a person with a disability, with his or her daily life, according to Merriam-Webster.

Caretaker denotes taking care of property; Caregiver denotes giving care to people.

Caucasian

European American*; White

The use of the term “Caucasian” as an alternative to “White” or “European” is discouraged because it originated as a way of classifying White people as a race to be favorably compared with other races. As with all discussions of race and ethnicity, it is preferable to be more specific about regional (e.g., Southern European, Scandinavian) or national (e.g., Italian, Irish, Swedish, French, Polish) origin when possible.

* Adjust as needed for location (i.e., European, European American, European Australian, etc.)

Chairman/woman

chairperson

Committed suicide

died by suicide

Crazy/loony/mad/

psycho/nuts/deranged/

insane/insanity/

mentally deranged/

psychopathology

mental illness*; mental disorder*; psychopathology(ical)

Once commonly used to describe people with mental illness; commonly used informally to denote mental instability or mental illness.

* Except in a quote or when referring to a criminal defense.

Cripple

Avoid in all instances*; use people first language and their diagnosis, i.e., “person with X”

Merriam-Webster defines the noun “cripple” as “a lame or partly disabled person or animal” and as “something flawed or imperfect.” It is also used as a verb. The word dates back to Old English, where it was related to words that meant to creep or bend over.

Deaf

D(d)eaf*; hard of hearing

Having total or partial hearing loss.

* NCDJ Recommendation: Lowercase when referring to a hearing-loss condition or to a deaf person who prefers lowercase. Capitalize for those who identify as members of the Deaf community or when they capitalize Deaf when describing themselves. “D(d)eaf” should be used as an adjective, not as a noun; it describes a person with profound or complete hearing loss. Other acceptable phrases include “woman who is deaf” or “boy who is hard of hearing.” When quoting or paraphrasing a person who has signed their responses, it’s appropriate on first reference to indicate that the responses were signed. It’s acceptable to use the word “said” in subsequent references. Per the National Association of the Deaf, "D(d)eaf" is acceptable.

Deformed/deformity (when referencing a person)

Avoid in all instances*; refer to specifics description rather than generalized term of deformity

Merriam-Webster defines as a part of the body that does not have the typical or expected shape

Dumb (mute)

nonverbal

Once widely used to describe a person who could not speak and also implied the inability to express oneself; however, someone who does not use speech still may have the ability of expression.

Dwarf/vertically challenged/midget

Dwarf*; short stature; little person

Dwarfism is a medical or genetic condition that results in a stature below 4’10,” according to Little People of America. The terms “little people” and “little person” refer to people of short stature and have come into common use since the founding of the Little People of America organization in 1957.

* Use only when applied to a medical diagnosis or in a quote.

Gay marriage/same-sex marriage

Marriage*

* When writing about the inability to legally marry, use “exclusion from Marriage” or “denial of marriage.”

Handicap

Use people first language; refer to the person's condition

The Oxford English dictionary defines a handicap as “a condition that restricts a person’s ability to function physically, mentally or socially.”

Homesexual/Gay

gay*; lesbian, bi(sexual)†

Short form term to reference gay, lesbian, and bisexual orientations, though not transgender people or gender identity. Anti-gay activists use “homosexual” as a slur to stigmatize gay people by reducing their lives to purely sexual terms.

* Only when used as an adjective (i.e., gay people); 

† Use bisexual as an adj. and as needed on first reference for clarity, otherwise default to bi.

Indian (when referencing Indigenous People)

Indigenous People; specific tribe

The Oxford English dictionary defines Indian in two ways: 

1) a native or inhabitant of India;* and 2) a member of any of the indigenous peoples of North, Central, and South America, especially those of North America.

* Acceptable use for Indian in this instance

Invalid (noun: in·​va·​lid)

Avoid in all instances*; use people first language and their diagnosis, ie, “person with X”

The Oxford English dictionary defines an invalid as “a person made weak or disabled by illness or injury.” It is probably the oldest term for someone living with physical conditions that are considered seriously limiting.

* Except when used in a direct quote

Lame

“difficulty walking”

Commonly used to describe difficulty walking as the result of an injury to the leg.

LGBT (when talking with those who are unfamiliar with the issues or are not supportive of the issues)

Gay and transgender; lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender*

Per “The Ally's Guide to Terminology”: Reference sexual orientation and gender identity when talking about issues pertaining to both. (See Transgender for more information.) The abbreviation “LGBT” can be confusing and alienating for those who are unfamiliar with the issues or not yet supportive—though it is essential when talking to LGBT and strongly supportive audiences. Use the term that allows your audience to stay focused on the message without creating confusion about your intended meaning.

* If needed for clarity

Man hours

Work hours

Man hours/man weeks

Work hours/work weeks

Man week

Work week

  Manned

Crewed; piloted; human

Manned aircraft

Crewed aircraft; piloted aircraft; human aircraft

Preferred gender inclusive terms by NASA

Manpower

Workforce; laborforce

Master/Slave

leader/follower; parent/child; primary/secondary; main/secondary*

* Preferred term from IEEE Thesaurus

Mentally ill/

emotionally disturbed

Person with a psychiatric disability

Minorities

People of color*; underrepresented groups†; 

marginalized

The use of “minority” may be viewed pejoratively because it is usually equated with being less than, oppressed, or deficient in comparison with the majority (i.e., White people).

* POC (people of color). 

† When possible, use the specific name of the group or groups to which you are referring.

Normal People

Person without X; 

the majority

Oriental (when referencing race)

Asian*; 

Asian American†

Avoid in all instances when referring to race

“Orientals” is considered pejorative; be more specific by providing nation and region of origin (Japanese, Chinese, Vietnamese, etc.).

* For people from Asia; 

† People of Asian descent in North America

Retarded/Slow learner

Learning disability*

Avoid in all instances

According to the University of Kansas Research & Training Center on Independent Living: “...describes a neurologically based condition that may manifest itself as difficulty learning and using skills in reading (called dyslexia), writing (dysgraphia), mathematics (dyscalculia) and other cognitive processes due to differences in how the brain processes information. Individuals with learning disabilities have average or above average intelligence, and the term does not include a learning problem that is primarily the result of another cause, such as intellectual disabilities or lack of educational opportunity.”

* Only when the condition has been medically diagnosed

Schizophrenic/Schizo

Person with schizophrenia

Sex change (operation)

Transition

Per hrc.org: The process by which some people strive to more closely align their internal knowledge of gender with its outward appearance. Some people socially transition, whereby they might begin dressing, using names and pronouns, and/or be socially recognized as another gender. Others undergo physical transitions in which they modify their bodies through medical interventions.

Transition is the accurate term that does not fixate on surgeries, which many transgender people do not or cannot undergo. Terms like “pre-op” or “postop” unnecessarily fixate on a person’s anatomy and should be avoided.

Sexual identity/

transgender identity

Gender identity/gender expression

Gender identity is one’s internal sense of gender.

Gender expression is how a person outwardly expresses their gender.

(Terms are not interchangeable.)

Many transgender people identify as male or female and not simply transgender. Pronouns express this identity: He/him; She/her; They/them.

Sexual Preference/Gay lifestyle/homosexual lifestyle/same-sex attractions/sexual identity

sexual orientation

“Sexual preference” is used by anti-gay activists to suggest that being gay is a choice; therefore, being gay can be changed. Using “lifestyle” insinuates much the same and stigmatizes gay people suggesting their lives should be viewed strictly as sexual.

Single/double-blind

Single/double-

anonymous

Preferred term from IEEE Thesaurus

Transgendered/

a transgender (n.)/

transgenders (n.)/

transvestite/tranny

Transgender

Transgender is an adjective, not a noun. “Trans” as shorthand is often used within the LGBTQ+ community, but not generally understood by general audiences.

Always use a transgender person’s chosen name. Also, a person who identifies as a certain gender should be referred to using pronouns consistent with that gender (he/him, she/her, they/them).

Unmanned

autonomous; uncrewed; remote

Unmanned aerial vehicles

Autonomous aerial vehicles (AAV)*; remote aerial vehicles (RAV); uncrewed aerial vehicles (UAV)

* Preferred term from IEEE Thesaurus

Unmanned automobiles or cars

Autonomous automobiles; remote automobiles

Preferred term from IEEE Thesaurus

Unmanned underwater vehicles

Autonomous underwater vehicles (AUV); remote underwater vehicles (RUV)

Preferred term from IEEE Thesaurus

Unmanned vehicles

Autonomous vehicles; remote vehicles

Preferred term from IEEE Thesaurus

Unsuccessful suicide

Attempted suicide

Wheelchair-bound

Wheelchair user/Uses a wheelchair

White box

Glass box

Preferred term from IEEE Thesaurus

Whitelist; white list

Access list

A whitelist (or white list) is a list or register of entities that, for one reason or another, are being provided a particular privilege, service, mobility, access or recognition. This can be a controversial view for some.

Preferred term from IEEE Thesaurus